1 - NOTATION AND UNITS AND EMPLOYED   1.0 - NOTATION   Equivalent rectangular compression block depth, k1c  Spacing of hairpins  Concrete cover measured from centre of gravity of tension reinforcement  Distance between loading point and support face in case of short cantilevers and brackets  Cross sectional area of compression reinforcement  Concrete area of web section  Concrete area of web section in case of beams  Gross area of concrete section in case of columns  Area enclosed by boundary line connecting centroids of reinforcing bars located at the corners of  the section   Area enclosed by center lines of walls in case of hollow box sections  Gross area of reinforced concrete wall  Cross-sectional area of reinforcement necessary for resisting horizontal force in case of short  cantilevers and brackets  Clear distance between parallel beams  Cross sectional area of stirrup bar or tie  Cross sectional area of tie resisting torsion (single bar)  Cross sectional area of tie resisting shear (single bar)  Cross sectional area of tension reinforcement  Cross sectional area of flexural reinforcement   Cross sectional area of longitudinal reinforcement necessary for resisting torsion  Cross sectional area of skin reinforcement in beams  Total cross sectional area of horizontal reinforcement in case of walls  Total cross sectional area of horizontal reinforcement resisting bending and horizontal forces in  case of brackets and short cantilevers  Total cross sectional area of longitudinal reinforcement in case of columns  Cross sectional area of total horizontal reinforcement in the region between top face and 2/3 of  the depth of section in case of brackets and short cantilevers  Total cross sectional area of shear reinforcement  Effective concrete area for each tensile reinforcing bar in members, At=2abw/n   Cross sectional area of shear reinforcement perpendicular to tension reinforcement in deep  beams  Cross sectional area of shear reinforcement parallel to tension reinforcement in deep beams  Cross sectional area of shear –friction reinforceme nt  W idth of footing under wall   Effective flange width for beam  Cross sectional dimension of column  Dimensions of smallest possible rectangle enclosing critical punching perimeter up (dimension  along eccentricity b1)  W idth of ribs in a ribbed slab  Web width of beam  Dimensions of critical punching perimeter up in x and y directions  Concrete cover measured from centre of gravity of extreme reinforcing bar  Distance from extreme compression fiber to neutral axis  Clear concrete cover  Moment coefficient in case of buckling  In slabs, average of effective depth in two directions   Effective depth in case of flexural members  In footings, average of effective depth values in two directions   Concrete cover measured from centroid of compres sion reinforcement  Minimum bend diameter  Diameter of circular column or diameter of circular load area  Earthquake effect  Eccentricity  Eccentricity in plane of bending to be considered in calculations  Clear distance between two successive ribs  Minimum eccentricity   5                             
Eccentricity in x and y directions  Modulus of elasticity of concrete  Modulus of elasticity of concrete in beams  Modulus of elasticity of "j" days old concrete  Modulus of elasticity of concrete in slabs  Modulus of elasticity of reinforcement (=2·105 MPa)  Flexural stiffness  Flexural stiffness of gross concrete section of column  Flexural stiffness of longitudinal reinforcement  Design compressive strength of concrete  Characteristic compressive strength of concrete  Characteristic compressive strength of "j" days old concrete  Average compressive strength of concrete  Minimum concrete compressive strength   Design tensile strength of concrete  Characteristic tensile strength of concrete  Average axial tensile strength of concrete  Maximum strength of longitudinal reinforcement  Design yield strength of longitudinal reinforcement  Characteristic yield strength of longitudinal reinforcement  Design yield strength of transverse reinforcement  Force  Sum of slab loads within critical punching perimeter (up)  Design force  Design load effect  Characteristic force  Permanent load effect  Shear modulus  Shear modulus of "j" days old concrete  Slab thickness  Member depth  Total depth of beam  Cross sectional dimension of column on its bending plane  Horizontal force effect (e.g. earth pressure)  Horizontal design force in case of brackets and short cantilevers  Moment of inertia  Gross moment of inertia of beam  Gross moment of inertia of column  Cracked moment of inertia about neutral axis  Effective moment of inertia  Gross moment of inertia of slab section  Radius of gyration  Column effective length factor  Equivalent rectangular compression block depth factor   W idth of part of footing under wall that projects beyond the wall  Span length to be used in calculations   Column length (measured from axis to axis)   Lap splice length   Span length of slab between support axes in direction considered   Span length of slab between support axes in the direction perpendicular to considered direction    Development length   Development length with hook   Equivalent thickness   ith storey column length (measured from axis to axis)   Column effective (buckling) length   Clear span of slab in the direction under consideration  Clear length of member  Clear span measured from one support face to the other    Clear distance between two inflection points of beam 
2 - DOCUMENTS RELATED TO THE STRUCTURE   2.1 - GENERAL   Documents  that are prepared  for all aspects of design and  inspection of RC structures both before  construction and for application during construction should at least include all of the information required by  this section. In addition to these documents, geotechnical site investigation reports and, if applicable, reports  explaining special methods to be used in construction and maintenance should be preserved with care  throughout the serviceability lifetime of the structure.   2.2 - STRUCTURAL ANALYSIS AND DESIGN CALCULATIONS   Hand or computer analysis and design calculations should start by providing the following information in  summary form under the title "Design Principles ”:   - Sketches explaining the structural system  - Soil type, foundation level, soil characteristics and safe bearing capacity of soil  - Specified steel reinforcement grade  - Specified concrete grade  - Related load specification, information about special loading cases if applicable  -  Information obtained from earthquake code (effective ground acceleration, ductility level, response  factor, etc.)  - Environmental conditions affecting structure and corresponding maximum crack width values  - Allowable horizontal and vertical deflection lim its  - Stability index of the structure and its independent parts   - Names of standards, specifications and sources used    The static and dynam ic analysis results should be presented in a clear and easily understandable format. If  equations or charts other than those given in related standards have been used in the analyses and design  calculations, this should be stated and copies of sources used should be attached to calculations.   In case of computer analyses, program inputs should be provided in a clear format so that program outputs  can be checked by carrying out hand calculations or using other programs if required. If the computer  program used has not been accepted as adequate  for  the structure  type under consideration by  the  competent authorities, its manuals should also be subm itted for verification. Equilibrium equations should  always be shown to be satisfied in program outputs.   2.3 - DRAWINGS   For reinforced concrete structures, drawings should be provided at each design stage. These drawings  should give required information in adequate detail and scale for the design stage under consideration. At  least the following information should be provided for application drawings showing formwork plan and  reinforcement detail:   - Specified concrete grade  - Cement type and the number of the related standard  - Specified reinforcement grade  - Nom inal maximum size of coarse aggregate  - Concrete workability  - Warnings and recommendations about formwork and formwork removal  - Clear cover values for different faces of different members  -  In case of foundation drawings, soil level, soil conditions, safe bearing capacity of soil, measures to be  taken for soil underneath the foundation  -  Information giving relationships between drawings  - Working loads considered in design and maximum loads that may develop during construction  - Position and dimension of holes, pipes and within concrete  - Schedules for steel bars showing dimensions and bending details.   Apart from the required information mentioned above, additional drawings and explanatory notes should be  provided for illustrating arrangements at construction joints and expansion joints.    2.4 - INSPECTION OF CONSTRUCTION   The inspection of construction should be conducted by authorized technical personnel with care to ensure  the realization of the conditions envisaged in the design project.   9       
A  journal or notebook showing  the general progress of work with dates must be maintained at  the  construction site. In this journal, information about aggregates and how their characteristics alter with time,  water/cement  ratio, concrete quality, workability  (slump) of  fresh concrete, natural water content of  aggregates, measured dilatation or swelling of sand specimens taken, frost (dates and duration) and daily  temperature changes should be provided. This journal should be made available to the building owner or the  inspector whenever requested.   2.5 - CHANGES IN THE PROJECT   Any project alterations, which are considered necessary due to problems arising during construction, should  be approved by the design engineer and recorded in signed documents, after which the sanction of related  authorities should be obtained.   10    
3 - MATERIALS   3.0 - NOTATION USED   TS 500  Web area of concrete section in case of beams  Gross area of concrete section in case of columns  Modulus of elasticity of concrete (28 days old)  Modulus of elasticity of j days old concrete  Modulus of elasticity of reinforcing steel (=2·105 MPa)  Characteristic compressive strength of concrete (28 days old)  Characteristic compressive strength of j days old concrete  Average compressive strength of concrete  Minimum concrete compressive strength   Characteristic tensile strength of concrete (28 days old)  Average tensile strength of concrete  Characteristic yield strength of longitudinal reinforcement  Rupture strength of longitudinal reinforcement  Shear modulus (28 days old)  Shear modulus of j days old concrete  Equivalent thickness  Perimeter of member cross-section  Thermal expansion coefficient  Creep strain  Shrinkage strain  Rupture strain of the longitudinal reinforcement  Creep Coefficient  Poisson ratio for concrete  Nom inal stress in concrete under sustained loading   3.1 - CONCRETE MATERIALS   3.1.2 - Cement   Cement, specified by the designer should be checked by means of tests to ensure strength, strength  increase and durability characteristics of concrete. Cement must be transported to the construction site in  accordance with the related standards and stored at the construction site properly so that its properties are  preserved.   3.1.3 -  Aggregates   Aggregates to be used in concrete should conform to TS 706. In the selection of the aggregates, the  characteristics of the structure as well as environmental conditions should be taken into account.    The grading of aggregates plays an important role in determ ining concrete characteristics and therefore the  most suitable granulometric grading of the aggregates to be used should be obtained by conducting tests.  The nom inal maximum size of coarse aggregate shall not be larger than any of the following: 1/5 of the  formwork breadth, 1/3 of the slab depth, 3/4 of the spacing between two longitudinal reinforcing bars and the  cover.   3.1.4 - Water   Water used in the concrete m ix should be in accordance with related standards. Mixing water should not be  acidic (pH value should be ‡7); it should be free from injurious amounts of carbonic acid, manganese  compounds, ammonium salts, free chlorine, m ineral oils, organic materials and industrial waste. W ater may  contain maximum 15g of dissolved and 2g of floating m ineral salt and a maximum of 2g of SO3 per liter.  Seawater must not be used in m ixing concrete containing high alum ina cement.   3.1.5 - Chemical Admixtures   Concrete chem ical adm ixtures to be used in concrete should satisfy the requirements of TS 3452.   3.2 - Steel Reinforcement   Reinforcement should satisfy the requirements of TS 708. Some of the important properties of reinforcing  steel specified in TS 708 are shown in Table 3.1.   The modulus of elasticity of reinforcement steel is 2·105 MPa.   Welding should not be applied to cold worked reinforcing bars. For weldable reinforcing bars of normal  hardness, welding may be used only if their carbon equivalents (as defined in TS 708) do not exceed 0.4.   12      
Table 3.1 Mechanical Properties of Reinforcing Bars (Taken from TS 708)   Mechanical Characteristics   Reinforcing Bars   Mesh  Reinforcement   Normal Hardness   Cold worked   S220a S420a S500a S420b S500bs S500bk   Minimum yield strength, fyk  (MPa)   Minimum rupture strength, fsu  (MPa)   Minimum rupture elongation, esu   3.3 - Concrete   For construction, concrete made on site or ready-m ix concrete can be used. If concrete is prepared on site,  materials to be used in the m ix should be automatically weighed and m ixed in a m ixer to satisfy the concrete  properties specified by the designer. If ready-m ix concrete is used, the requirements of TS11222 should be  satisfied.   3.3.1 - Concrete Grades and Concrete Compressive Strength   Concrete is classified according to its compressive strength. Compressive strength should be determ ined by  testing 28 days old standard cylindrical concrete specimens with 150 mm diameter and 300 mm height in  accordance with requirements of TS 3068. Concrete characteristic compressive strength fck is the value for  which the probability of obtaining a lower compressive strength from tests on cylinders is a definite ratio (in  general 10 percent). The compressive strength of concrete can be obtained from cube tests as well. Under  such circumstances, the concrete characteristic compressive strength fck can be derived by making use of  conversion coefficients validated by tests. Equivalent strength for 150 mm cubes are given in Table 3.2. For  200 mm cube specimens the cube strength given in the table should be reduced by 5 percent.   Table 3.2 Concrete Grades and Strengths   Concrete  Grade   Characteristic  Compressive  Strength  fck   Equivalent Cube  (200 mm)  Compressive  Strength   Characteristic Axial  Tension Strength   fctk   MPa   1.4  1.5  1.6   1.8  1.9   2.1  2.2  2.3   2.5   28 Day  Elastic  Modulus  Ec   MPa   2  3.3.2 - Concrete Tensile Strength   Concrete tensile strength should be obtained from axial tension tests. The average tensile strength obtained  from tests is fctm whereas fctk is the characteristic tensile strength. The concrete characteristic tensile strength  fctk is the value for which the probability of obtaining a lower tensile strength from tests on axial tension  specimens is a definite ratio (in general 10percent). The concrete characteristic tensile strength shall be  calculated by using the equation given below:   ctk =  f  0  .  35  f  ck  (  MPa  )  (3.1)   For certain concrete grades, the tensile strength values obtained from this equation are given in Table 3.2.  Concrete tensile strength can also be obtained from flexural tests and split cylinder tests. The tensile  strength fctk can approximately be obtained by dividing the tensile strength values obtained from the split  cylinder test by 1.5 and the tensile strength values from the flexural test result by 2.0.   13                      
3.3.3 -  Modulus of Elasticity, Shear Modulus, Poisson Ratio and Thermal Expansion Coefficient of  Concrete  3.3.3.1 - Modulus of Elasticity   For normal weight "j" days old concrete, the modulus of elasticity can be calculated from the following  equation:   =  3250  E  cj  +  f  ckj  14000  (MPa  )  (3.2)   The fckj value in this equation is the characteristic compressive strength of j days old concrete. For impact  loading, modulus of elasticity values obtained from Equation 3.2 should be increased by 10 percent. Ec  values for 28-day-old different concrete are given in Table 3.2 for different concrete grades. Results obtained  from Equation 3.2 are secant moduli of elasticity corresponding to the 0.4fck stress level.   3.3.3.2 - Poisson Ratio   The Poisson ratio of concrete can be taken as mc=0.2.   3.3.3.3 - Shear Modulus   The shear modulus of concrete can be calculated approximately from the equation given below.   3.3.3.4 - Thermal Expansion Coefficient   The thermal expansion coefficient of concrete may be taken as at=10-5/0C   3.3.4 - Time Dependent Deformation of Concrete   In case of inadequate data, coefficients related to creep of concrete can be obtained from Table 3.3 and  coefficients related to shrinkage of concrete can be obtained from table 3.4. Values given in these tables are  reached within 2-3 years. For shorter periods, methods proven  to be correct should be used. Linear  interpolation should be employed to find intermediate values of relative hum idity, age of concrete and  fictitious thickness.   3.4 - QUALITY CONTROL and Acceptance of Concrete Quality   At the construction site, concrete compressive strength should be determ ined by conducting quality tests on  specimens cured in accordance with TS 3351. The site engineer may require hardening tests for specimens  that are to be stored under site conditions. As mentioned in section 3.3.1, these tests are conducted on  150mmX300mm standard cylinders.  In compelling situations, cube specimens may be employed. For  evaluation, groups each consisting of three cylindrical or cubic specimens should be considered.   Table 3.3 Creep Coefficient fce (for long periods)   Dry environment  (relative hum idity 50percent)   Moist environment  (relative hum idity (80percent)   50  5.4  3.9  3.2  2.6  2.0   Equivalent Thickness (mm), le = 2Ac / u   150  4.4  3.2  2.5  2.1  1.6   600  3.6  2.5  2.0  1.6  1.2   50  3.5  2.5  1.9  1.6  1.2   150  3.0  2.1  1.7  1.4  1.0   600  2.6  1.9  1.5  1.2  1.0   Concrete  Age at  Loading    1 day   7 day   28 days   90 days   365 days   Note:   e =  ce  s  co  E  c  f  ce  Table 3.4 Shrinkage Strains, ecs ×10  3 (for long periods)   Environment  (Relative hum idity 50percent)   Moist environment  (Relative hum idity 80percent)   Equivalent Thickness (mm), le = 2Ac / u   150  0.60  0.40   600  0.50  0.40   150  0.40  0.25   600  0.30  0.25   Concrete  Maintenance   Inadequate  Adequate   14              
At least one group (3 specimens) of test specimens should be taken from each production unit for quality  control. A production unit is composed of concrete having the same target design strength and the same  ingredients in the same m ix proportions. Furthermore, one unit can not exceed 100m3 (by volume) or 450 m2  (by area) of concrete placed on the same day. From each batch, at least 3 groups (9 specimens) should be  taken as samples. The specimens of each group shall be stored under standard conditions and tested under  uniaxial compression. Each specimen shall be taken from a different transm ixer or concrete m ixer. If more  than one specimen is taken from the same concrete m ixer, they should be counted as one specimen and  their average strength value should be taken into consideration. Specimens should be taken, cured and  prepared in accordance with TS 2940, TS 3068 and TS 3351 and tests should be carried out in accordance  with TS 3114.   When ready m ixed concrete is used, in addition to the specimens taken at the plant, specimens, in manner  and number a described above, should be taken at the construction site as well. The evaluation should  primarily be based on the specimens taken at the construction site. Specimen, groups of three cylinders  each, should successively be named as G1, G2, G3 …G n in the order in which they are taken and the average  compressive strength of each group should be obtained.   If each successive party consisting of 3 groups named as P1 (G1, G2, G3), P2 (G2, G3, G4), P3 (G3, G4, G5)  …P n-2 do not satisfy both of the requirements mentioned below, the concrete will be rejected.   Average of each party   Minimum group average in each party   fcm ‡ fck + 1.0 MPa   fcmin ‡ fck - 3.0 MPa   Specimens taken for hardening test should be stored at site conditions and tested at a suitable time as  required. The purpose of conducting the hardening test, which should be carried out on at least 3 specimens,  is to check whether the curing and storing of concrete are satisfactory or not, and to establish the time  required for the removal of the formwork.   If the results obtained from the quality control tests do not satisfy the requirements mentioned above, the  load bearing capacity of structure or of the structural members involved should be re-evaluated by using the  low concrete strength obtained.  In case significant strength reduction  is obtained, necessary remedial  measures should be taken.    The supervising engineer may require tests to determ ine the compressive strength of concrete in the  structure whenever it is necessary. This can be done by taking cores from locations that will not result in any  strength reduction in the structure or by making use of non-destructive testing methods (surface hardness,  sound velocity tests, etc.). In case of inspection with non-destructive tests, correlation of results with the  concrete used in that structure should be established.   15        
4 - PREPARING CONCRETE AND REINFORCEMENT   4.1 - GENERAL   Before starting construction work, m ix calculations should be carried out in accordance with TS 802 with the  object of obtaining the required average concrete compressive strength (fcm), which would provide the  concrete characteristic compressive strength used in design (fck). By preparing trial m ixes, it should be  checked that the required concrete properties can be obtained.   After arriving at  the m ix proportions  that would provide  the required concrete characteristics,  materials at the site and the resulting concrete obtained should be tested at frequent intervals.   the m ix   4.2 - MIXING, CONVEYING, DEPOSITING AND CURING CONCRETE   Mix proportions should be prepared according to weight, and calculations on a volume basis are not allowed.  Mixing, conveying, depositing and curing of concrete should be in accordance with TS 1247, TS 1248 and/or  TS 11222; if harmful underground water and the effects of gases are present, the requirements of TS3440  should be satisfied.   4.3 - PLACING REINFORCEMENT   Reinforcing steel should be cleaned free of dirt, oil and surface rust before use. Special care should be taken  to place reinforcement in the location specified in the design drawings. Primary tension or compression  reinforcement should be tied up properly with distribution reinforcement and ties.    In columns,  longitudinal reinforcement should be confined with  ties. Before casting concrete,  the site  engineer and supervising engineer should check whether the amount and placement of the reinforcement  are in accordance with the design drawings and prepare a signed record to this effect.    While casting concrete, no change should occur in the position of the reinforcement. To achieve the required  concrete cover around the reinforcing bars, the reinforcement should be lifted up and concrete spacing  blocks (chairs) should be placed between the formwork and reinforcing bars, and bits of steel bar should be  placed as spacers between two layers of reinforcing bars. Instead of concrete and steel spacers, small  plastic blocks produced for this purpose can be used. Special care should be taken to cover ties with  concrete completely on the sides and in the case of slabs and beams, to prevent the top reinforcement from  being forced downwards. It must be ensured that reinforcement is fully covered by concrete.   In case of structural members which will be placed directly on soil (as in foundation slabs), a concrete layer  at least 50 mm thick should be provided as cover between the soil and the structural member, depending on  the type of soil.   17    
5 - FORMWORKS AND SCAFFOLDING   5.1 - GENERAL   All formworks and scaffolding should have adequate stability and safe load carrying capacity. Formwork and  scaffold members should be prepared, connected and set up in accordance with related codes so as to  prevent excessive deformation and settlement. Timber  formwork and scaffold members should be  designated to conform to TS 647 and steel formwork and scaffold members should be designated to conform  to TS 648.   Planks form ing the timber formwork should be sufficiently tight to prevent leakage of grout during concrete  compaction and they should have adequate strength against vibrator effects.   It should be ensured that all loads, which will act on the formworks during their use, should be carried safely.  Special care should be taken in case of formworks and scaffolds that are supported by intermediate slabs or  other structural members as during  the construction of an additional storey or  in strengthening and  rehabilitation work.   Vertical loads from scaffolds should be transferred to the soil ensuring load distribution in an appropriate  manner, and special precautions should be taken in case of loose soil and frozen soil conditions. Load  transfer and transm ission should be provided by inserting well-finished timber wedges, which have adequate  strength and which would remain in position underneath the vertical struts (for this purpose brick or stone  should not be used). W hen these supports cannot be constructed as a single piece and instead need to be  arranged in layers, safety against overturning should be provided. In case of inclined struts, safety against  sliding should be provided as well.   During the placement of the reinforcement and casting concrete, scaffolding for work safety should be  provided.   Formwork and scaffolding should be organized so as to be dismantled easily and safely without shock or  vibration. Use should be made of available dismantling procedures using wedges, sand boxes, bolts, jacks,  etc.   In order to ensure that structural members with long spans will acquire the position envisaged in the design  after  removal of  formworks and scaffolds  the  formworks and scaffolds should be provided with  the  appropriate amount of camber.   Before concrete placement, the interior of the formwork should be well cleaned; if required they should be  wetted. For this purpose cleaning holes should be provided in the bottom regions of columns, at the free  ends of cantilevers and at the soffits of deep beams.   Before and during casting concrete, all formwork and scaffolds should be checked carefully.   W ithout the perm ission of the supervising engineer, materials should not be placed or piled up on the  formwork.   5.2 - FORMWORK AND SCAFFOLDING LOADS   While designing formworks and scaffolds, the self-weight of the formworks and scaffolds, the self-weight of  freshly placed or piled-up concrete, the self-weight of vehicles being used to carry concrete, impact effects  occurring while casting concrete and the self-weight of laborers should be considered as vertical loads.    As horizontal  loads, other  than  the wind effect,  tension  in cables  (if applicable) and  components of the support reactions of inclined members etc should be considered.   the horizontal   When compaction of concrete is carried out with a vibrator, especially in case of concrete in a plastic or fluid  state, the hydrostatic lateral pressure effect transferred to the forms due to concrete possessing a density of  25 kN/m3 should be considered.    5.3 - DRAWINGS   In case of multi-storey and free standing (self supporting) scaffolds, formwork and scaffold design drawings  required for strength and stability checks should be provided.   5.4 - FORMWORK AND SCAFFOLD SUPPORTS   All formworks and scaffolds should be supported both horizontally and vertically so that they can transfer  horizontal forces to the soil safely. Scaffold support bracing should generally be arranged to form a triangular  truss pattern.    19    
Bracing bars should be arranged in such a manner that as far as possible no bending moments are  produced in the vertical struts.   Truss-like bracing does not need to be provided only if the struts are restrained from moment by being  connected near the support regions and along the strut to fixed points or strong walls by encastering or  sim ilar measures.    During the setting up (assembly) stage, formworks and scaffolds should possess adequate rigidity.   Formwork struts should be constructed in accordance with the related codes. In case of timber formworks,  second and third class timber should be used. In the case of single storey structures, if the scaffold height  does not exceed 5m and if all loads are transferred to the soil with vertical struts, the adequacy of whose  section properties is known beforehand, there is no need for a buckling check unless there is reason for  doubt. In all other cases, strength and buckling calculations should be carried out for formworks and  scaffolds.   5.5 - REMOVAL OF FORMWORKS   No formwork or strut supporting any part of the structure shall be removed before presenting the test results  related to concrete strength to the supervising engineer and obtaining his approval. The time required after  concrete placement, for formwork removal depends on the type of cement used, the rate of concrete  strength gain, the water/cement ratio, the type of structural loading, the magnitudes of the load effects and  on weather conditions.   Special attention should be given to parts of the structure that are envisaged to carry loads equal to the  design loads right after formwork removal.    If frost occurs during hardening of concrete, the removal of formworks should be delayed by a period of time  at least equal to the frost duration. A decrease of temperature to 00C in the shade during a 24-hour period  should be considered as frost. After the end of the frost duration, the hardening stage of concrete should be  investigated before removal of formwork to decide whether the concrete has adequately set or whether it  looks hardened because it is frozen.   In case of adverse weather conditions and especially in case of frost, the removal time of formwork should  be decided upon on the basis of results from compression tests on specimens that have hardened under the  same conditions as the concrete in the structure.   Extra struts should be maintained in their original positions for a suitable period after formwork removal. The  duration of this period depends on cement type. The days on which the temperature falls below 50C should  not be included in this period.   Under special conditions the supervising engineer may reduce the duration of these periods. However tests  should be conducted to prove that the concrete has reached an adequate strength.   20    
6 - BASIC PRINCIPLES OF REINFORCED CONCRETE DESIGN   6.0 - NOTATION    Support width  Clear distance between parallel beams  Flange width of beam  Web width of beam  Earthquake loading  Eccentricity  Minimum eccentricity  Force  Design force  Design load effect  Characteristic force  Design compressive strength of concrete  Characteristic compressive strength of concrete  Characteristic axial tensile strength of concrete  Design axial tensile strength of concrete  Design yield strength of longitudinal reinforcement  Characteristic yield strength of longitudinal reinforcement  Permanent load effect  Horizontal load (e.g. earth pressure) effect  Cross sectional dimension of column in the direction of bending   l   Span length to be used in calculations  Length between two inflection (zero moment) points of beam  Amount of support moment reduction  Live load effect  Design strength  Load effect due to temperature change, shrinkage, differential settlement, etc.  Thickness of beam flange (deck)  Shear force  W ind effect  Material coefficient  Material coefficient for concrete  Material coefficient for reinforcement  Ratio of tension reinforcement in beams  Ratio of compression reinforcement in beams  Balanced reinforcement ratio   6.1 - GENERAL   The purpose of structural analysis and section design of reinforced concrete structures is to ensure that the  structure during its serviceability lifetime behaves in accordance with the envisaged purpose.    Structures and structural members should be designed  for a definite safety  level and  for continuous  serviceability under all possible loads and deformations that can affect the building during the construction  and utilization stages.   Design calculations for the purpose described above should be based on scientific principles, experimental  data and on past experience.   The design calculations performed for reinforced concrete structures are valid only if the envisaged material  strengths are achieved on site.   In case the material strengths obtained are considerably different from the specified value, the results of the  design calculations will lose their validity.   6.2 - STRUCTURAL SAFETY   6.2.1 - General   In design, the required safety against collapse during the service life of the structure should be provided and  in addition cracking, deformation, vibration etc. should not exceed  levels which would  impair  the   21
serviceability and affect the strength of the structure. To achieve this, the load effects on the structure should  be magnified by load factors and material strengths should be reduced by material factors during the design  stage. These factors are based on statistical data.   6.2.2 - Limit States Method   To achieve the required structural safety defined above, the important lim it state conditions which may be  encountered during the lifetime of the structure: (i) ultimate lim it state and (ii) serviceability lim it state should  be checked.   6.2.3 - Ultimate Limit State   The ultimate capacity of each structural member calculated by using reduced material strengths (design  strengths) as defined in section 6.2.5 shall not be smaller than the internal forces that develop due to design  loads magnified as defined in section 6.2.6.   R  d  ‡  F  d  6.2.4 - Serviceability Limit State   (6.1)   Deflection, deformation, crack width values of each structural member, calculated by using methods  explained in chapter 13, should not exceed the corresponding lim iting values given in the same section.   6.2.5 - Material Factors   Considering the statistical distribution of material strengths, “design strength” values to be used in  design  calculations should be obtained by dividing the characteristic material strengths defined in Section 3 by the  corresponding “material factors ” which are equal to  or greater than 1.0. For the ultimate lim it state, concrete  and steel design strengths are given below:   Concrete:   fcd = fck / gmc  fctd = fctk / gmc  fyd = fyk / gms  Steel:  gmc=1.5 shall be taken for concrete cast in situ. This factor can be taken as 1.4 for precast concrete.  However, if concrete quality control is not satisfactory, then with the designer's approval this factor can be  taken as 1.7. For all steel grades, the material factor shall be taken as 1.15 (gms=1.15). For calculations  dealing with the serviceability lim it state, material factors should usually taken as equal to 1.0.   (6.2)   6.2.6 - Load Factors and Load Combinations   The probability of exceeding the characteristic load effect value, Fk, during the service lifetime of structure is  equal to a certain value. Characteristic load effect values given in this standard are in accordance with TS  498 and TS ISO 9194 and “Specifications for Structu res to be Built in Disaster Areas ” published by the  Ministry of Public Works and Settlement.   In design, all possible load combinations that can possibly act on the structure should be considered. Load  combinations that are usually encountered in calculations are given below:   For vertical loads only   Fd = 1.4G + 1.6Q   Fd = 1.0G + 1.2Q + 1.2T   (6.3)   (6.4)   T in Equation 6.4 is the load effect created by temperature change, shrinkage, differential settlement and  sim ilar deformations and displacements. This load combination should be considered only when such effects  are not negligible.   When wind loading is considered, in addition to Equations 6.3 and 6.4 the following load combinations shall  be taken into account:   Fd = 1.0G + 1.3Q + 1.3W   Fd = 0.9G + 1.3W   (6.5)   (6.6)   When earthquake loading is considered, in addition to Equations 6.3 and 6.4 the following load combinations  shall be taken into account:   Fd = 1.0G + 1.0Q + 1.0E   Fd = 0.9G + 1.0E   22  (6.7)   (6.8)         
When horizontal soil pressure  is present,  combinations shall be taken into account:   in addition   to Equations 6.3 and 6.4   the   following   load   Fd = 1.4G + 1.6Q   Fd = 0.9G + 1.6H   (6.9)   (6.10)   When fluid pressure is present, this pressure should be multiplied by 1.4 and should be added to all load  combinations in which there is live load.   In case of the serviceability lim it state, described above in Section 6.2.4, all load coefficients should be taken  equal to 1.0.   6.3 - STRUCTURAL ANALYSIS   6.3.1 - Methods of Analysis   Internal forces, which provide the basis for the dimensioning of the sections of structural members, should be  obtained by an analysis in accordance with the principles of structural mechanics. This analysis based on the  stress-strain relationships of concrete and steel may be a nonlinear method or a method that is based on the  assumption of linear elastic structural behavior. Moments obtained for continuous beams and slabs by using  linear elastic methods, can be modified as described in Section 6.3.8; provided that the real behavior is  taken into consideration and equilibrium conditions are fully satisfied.    6.3.2 - Loads   Load effects due to temperature change, shrinkage and creep are given in this standard. Others should be  obtained from TS 498, TS ISO 9194 and “Specificatio ns for Structures to be Built in Disaster Areas ”  prepared by the Ministry of Public W orks and Settlement. In case of special structures, loads should be  chosen from specifications especially formulated for those structures.   6.3.3 - Arrangement of Live Loads   For all load combinations, except those including earthquake loading, the live load should be arranged on  the structure so as to provide the most critical (unsuitable) internal force effects.   6.3.4 - Expansion, Shrinkage and Creep Effects   By considering temperature change and shrinkage effects, expansion joints should be provided in the  superstructure of long span indeterm inate structures. In case of structures, which are open to external  environmental effects, the spacing of expansion joints should not exceed 40m. In the case of frames  protected against temperature changes and in the case of frame type structures that do not have stiff shear  walls at the edges, the spacing of the expansion joints can be increased up to 60m. These lim its may be  exceeded if calculations for time dependent behavior are carried out or if measures are taken to protect the  structure against shrinkage. In the case of asymmetric systems and for symmetric systems with stiff vertical  members at both ends, preventing horizontal displacement, care should be taken to keep the spacing of  joints shorter. In the analysis of statistically indeterm inate structures, the shrinkage effect can be introduced  into  the calculations as  temperature drop.  If detailed calculations are not conducted,  the amount of  shortening due to shrinkage can be obtained from Table 3.4. For statically indeterm inate structures, the  member bending stiffness (EI) may be reduced to calculate the long-term effect of temperature change and  shrinkage. Coefficients required  for creep calculations can be obtained  from Table 3.3. The concrete  modulus of elasticity should not be reduced when strains due to shrinkage are calculated.   6.3.5 - Design Span Lengths   Span length to be used in design of beams and slabs should be the distance from the centerline of one  support to the centerline of the other support. This value can be reduced up to a value of 1.05 times the clear  span length value when beams and slabs are monolithically cast with the supports. When beams and slabs  are not cast monolithically with the supports, this value can be reduced up to the sum of clear span value  plus the member depth.   6.3.6 - Effective Flange Width   The flange width of T beams required for the cross sectional area and moment of inertia calculations can be  obtained by using equations given below.   Symmetric cross-sections (T section):   b = bw + 0.2lp   Non-symmetric cross-sections (L section, etc):   b = b1 + 0.1lp   (6.11)   (6.12)   However the overhanging flange on each side beyond the web cannot exceed 6 times the flange thickness   or half of the distance to the next beam face. lp used above is the distance between the two inflection (zero  moment) points of beam. If precise calculations are not conducted, lp can be taken as:   23      
TS 500    (6.13)   TURKISH STANDARD   lp = 1.0l (single span, simply supported beam)     = 0.8l (end span of continuous beam)     = 0.6l (internal span of continuous beam)     = 1.5l (cantilever beam)   Here, l is the design span length of beam.   Figure 6.1 Dimensions of flanged section   6.3.7 - Stiffnesses   In case of structural analysis based on linear elastic behavior, unless otherwise stated in this standard, the  gross sectional moment of inertia and the value of the modulus of elasticity of concrete given in table 3.2  should be the basis of calculations.   6.3.8 - Redistribution   In case of frame beams, continuous beams and slabs, it is possible to change support moment values,  obtained from linear elastic structural analysis, by the ratios given below. However when this is done, the  span moments should be recalculated to satisfy the requirements of equilibrium.   If (r-r¢) £ 0.4rb; then the maximum change can be15 percent  If 0.4rb < (r-r¢) £ 0.6rb; then the maximum change can be10 percent  rb in this equation is the balanced reinforcement ratio as defined in section 0.2.1.4.   6.3.9 - Support Moment Correction   (6.14)   In case of continuous flexural members, the moment calculated at the support centerline may be reduced by  up to,    In this equation “V” is the shear force at the supp  ort and “a” is the support width.   6.3.10 - Minimum Eccentricity Requirement   Eccentricity, based on column end moments obtained from the structural analysis, should not be less than  the m inimum eccentricity value obtained from Equation 6.16.   emin = 15 mm + 0.02h   (6.16)   Here “h” is the cross sectional dimension of the co  lumn in the direction of bending.   24 
7 - SECTION DESIGN (ULTIMATE STRENGTH) – BENDING AN D COMBINED BENDING  Gross area of concrete section   Area of tension reinforcement  Area of compression reinforcement  Cross sectional area of intermediate reinforcement in beams  Total cross sectional area of longitudinal reinforcement in columns  Support width  Equivalent rectangular compression block depth, k1c  Web width of beam  Moment coefficient in case of buckling  Distance from extreme compression fiber to neutral axis  Clear concrete cover  Effective depth in beams  Concrete cover measured from centroid of compres sion reinforcement  Seism ic load effect  Modulus of elasticity of concrete  Flexural rigidity  Flexural rigidity of the gross column section  Flexural rigidity of the column longitudinal reinforcement   Modulus of elasticity of reinforcement (=2·105 MPa)  Design load effect  Design compressive strength of concrete  Characteristic compressive strength of concrete  Design tensile strength of concrete  Design yield strength of longitudinal reinforcement  Permanent load effect  Total depth of beam  Moment of inertia  Gross moment of inertia of column  Radius of gyration  Column effective length coefficient  Equivalent rectangular compression block depth coefficient  Column length, measured from axis to axis  ith story column length, measured from axis to axis   Column effective (buckling) length   Clear span from support face to support face  Clear length of column  Design bending moment  Column end moments (multiplied by load factors in the analysis)  Axial design load  Permanent load contribution to axial design force  Column buckling load  Live load effect  Creep coefficient  Thickness of beam flange (deck)  Design shear force  Total shear force at ith story  Permanent load contribution to design shear force  W ind effect  Average of a1 and a2 ratios  Column end restraint coefficients (a1 £ a2 )  Moment magnification factor for the column  Moment magnification factor for all columns of a story  Drift at ith story  Concrete crushing strain  Strain in reinforcing steel  Strain in reinforcing steel at maximum strength   25    
Stability index  Ratio of tension reinforcement in beams, As /(bwd)  Ratio of compression reinforcement in beams, A ¢s /(bwd)  Ratio of tension reinforcement for balanced case in beams  Maximum ratio of tension reinforcement in beams  Minimum ratio of tension reinforcement in beams  Total ratio of longitudinal reinforcement in columns  Maximum ratio of longitudinal reinforcement in columns  Stress in reinforcing steel   7.1 -  ASSUMPTIONS   The ultimate strength design of sections is based on the following assumptions:   - The tensile strength of concrete is neglected  - Perfect bond between reinforcing bar and surrounding concrete exists, so that the strain in the  reinforcement is taken as equal to the strain of the concrete fiber at the same level.  - Plane sections remain plane after bending  - When the ultimate capacity  is reached, the compressive strain in the extreme concrete fiber in  compression is ecu = 0.003.  - Steel reinforcement behaves elasto-plastically  ss = Es es £ fyd   (7.1)   For all reinforcing steels, the modulus of elasticity is Es = 2·105 MPa and the strain at the maximum strength  shall be taken as 0.1.   For the concrete compressive stress distribution at the ultimate stage, any distribution providing substantial  agreement with experimental results can be used. However, for simplicity in the calculations, instead of the  actual compressive stress distribution, an equivalent rectangular concrete stress block with the following  characteristics can be used. The width of the rectangular stress block is taken equal to the equivalent  compressive strength 0.85 ×f cd. The depth of the stress block can be obtained by multiplying the distance  from the extreme compression fiber to the neutral axis by the coefficient k1 i.e. a=k1c. k1 values for various  concrete grades are given in Table 7.1.   Table 7.1 k1 values for different concrete grades   Concrete Grade - BASIC PRINCIPLES   Structural analysis should be carried out using the load factors and load combinations given in section 6.2.6  and principles given in section 6.3. Proportioning of the section and calculation of the required reinforcement  should be based on the most unfavorable internal force values obtained from structural analysis and using  the design strength values given in Clause 6.2.5.   7.3 -  REQUIREMENTS FOR FLEXURAL MEMBERS (BEAMS)   If the axial compressive force does not exceed the lim it given below, such members are defined as flexural  members, i.e. beams.   Nd £ 0.1fck Ac   (7.2)   Of flexural members, requirements related to beams are given in this section and requirements related to  slabs are given in Section 11.   The total depth of a beam shall neither be less than 300 mm nor less than three times the slab thickness.  The beam web width should neither be less than 200 mm nor be more than the sum of the beam height and  column width (see figure 7.1).   26        
Figure 7.1 Dimensions of beam section   The ribs of ribbed slabs, secondary beams that are not frame beams, pre-tensioned and precast beams do  not necessarily need to satisfy the above requirements related to beam dimensions.   The clear concrete cover of beams, cc, except in special structures, shall not be less than 25mm for exterior  members and 20mm for interior members (see figure 7.1). These values must be increased in case of  unfavorable environmental conditions and when greater fire safety is needed.   The clear spacing between two reinforcing bars in a single layer and between two layers of reinforcement  shall not be less than 20mm nor less than both the bar diameter and 4/3 times the nom inal maximum coarse  aggregate dimension. When reinforcing bars are bundled together, the equivalent diameter fe should be  used (Fig. 9.4). When more than one reinforcement layer exists, reinforcing bars should be aligned exactly  on top of each other.   Bars in beams should be bent beyond the theoretical bar cut-off points. This distance should not be smaller  than one-third the effective depth nor less than 8 bar diameters. The distance between the theoretical and  actual cut-off points for secondary, bars should not be less than the effective depth nor less than 20 bar  diameters for deformed bars or 40 bars diameters for plain bars.   In beams the ratio of tension reinforcement, r, should not be less than the m inimum values given below. The difference between the tension and compression reinforcement ratios in beams should not exceed 0.85  of the balanced reinforcement.   rrr - £¢  max =  0  .  85  r  b  In addition, the ratio of tension reinforcement should not exceed the lim it given below.   £r  0.  02  (7.4)   (7.5)   In case of beams, bars with diameters less than 12 mm shall not be used as longitudinal reinforcement.   In case of beams with webs deeper than 600 mm, intermediate reinforcement should be used. The amount  of  the  intermediate  reinforcement shall be at  least equal  to  that obtained  from Equation 7.6. This  reinforcement should be arranged  in equal amounts at  the  faces of  the web. The diameter of  these  reinforcing bars should be least 10 mm and the vertical spacing should not exceed 300 mm.   =l  A  s  0  .  001 b  d  w  (7.6)   27                
TS 500    At least one third of the tension reinforcement at the m id-span should extend up to the supports and be  properly anchored there.  Continuous beams with clear span less than 2.5 times the total beam depth and simple beams with a clear  span less than 1.5 times the total beam depth should be designed as deep beams. Non-linear strain  distribution and lateral buckling should be taken into account in the design of such members.   The ratio of tension reinforcement, r, for deep beams, calculated using the effective depth, must satisfy the  requirement given in Equation 7.3. The shear capacity design requirements for these beams are given in  Section 8.5.   7.4 - REQUIREMENTS FOR MEMBERS SUBJECTED TO AXIAL FORCE AND BENDING (COLUMNS)   7.4.1 -  Axial Compression and Bending   The width of rectangular column sections shall not be less than 250 mm. However in the case of I, T and L  column sections, the smallest thickness can be 200 mm and in case of hollow box column sections, the  smallest wall thickness can be 120 mm. In case of circular column sections, the diameter of the section shall  not be less than 300 mm. In addition, the column axial load shall satisfy the following requirement:    The clear concrete cover, cc, of columns shall not be less than 25 mm for exterior members and 20 mm for  interior members.   The total longitudinal reinforcement ratio for columns shall not be less than the value given below.  However if at least 1.3 times the required reinforcement is provided, this lim it may be reduced to 0.005.   For columns ties, there should be at least one longitudinal reinforcing bar at each corner. For columns with  spiral reinforcement, there should be at least 6 longitudinal reinforcing bars. In columns, the longitudinal  reinforcing bar diameters shall not be less than 14 mm. The total longitudinal reinforcement ratio for columns  shall not exceed the values given below:   Outside the lapped splice region r £ 0.04   W ithin the lapped splice region rt £ 0.06   (7.9)   (7.10)   Longitudinal column reinforcement should be confined by transverse reinforcement over the column height.  The diameter of  the  transverse  reinforcement shall not be  less  than 1/3 of  the  largest  longitudinal  reinforcement diameter. The spacing of transverse reinforcement shall neither exceed 12 times the smallest  longitudinal reinforcement diameter nor 200 mm. In the case of rectangular columns, the spacing of ties or  cross ties should not exceed 300 mm.   7.4.2 - Axial Tension and Bending   In the design calculations of members subjected to axial tension in addition to bending, the effect of axial  tension must not be ignored.   The ultimate capacity of a member, the whole section of which is subjected to tension, should be designed  by ignoring the concrete contribution and considering only the contribution of the longitudinal reinforcement  as given in the equation below:   Nd = Ast fyd   (7.11)   The longitudinal reinforcement of such members should be arranged as symmetrically as possible. In the  case of members for which the whole section is in tension, the ratio of longitudinal reinforcement must not be  less than the value given below:   =r  t  51.  f  f  ctd  yd  (7.12)   7.5 - MEMBERS UNDER AXIAL COMPRESSION AND BIAXIAL BENDING    The ultimate strength calculations of members under axial compression and biaxial bending should be based  on the assumptions given in section 7.1 and should be conducted by using a suitable method of proven  validity.   28          
7.6 - SLENDERNESS EFFECT   7.6.1 - General Method   TS 500    The design and dimensioning of members under axial compression and bending under  the  load  combinations given in Section 6.2 should be based on axial force and moment values obtained from a  second-order analysis considering material nonlinearity and cracking as well as shrinkage and creep of  concrete. However, if the slenderness ratio does not exceed lk /i£100, the approximate method of section  7.6.2 can be used for the design of the section.   7.6.2 - Approximate Method (Moment Magnification Method)   This approximate method can be applied to columns whose section dimensions and axial load do not vary  over their height. The design moment for the column should be obtained by magnifying the larger end  moment, which is obtained from an analysis based on linear elastic behavior and satisfying the m inimum  eccentricity requirement of section 6.3.10, by an appropriate magnification factor.   7.6.2.1 - The Sway Criterion   If shear walls or sim ilar members exist in a structural system providing adequate stiffness against horizontal  forces, sway can be assumed to be prevented. If the column end moments obtained from a second-order  analysis, which is based on linear material behavior assumption, differ at the most by 5 percent from column  end moments obtained from a first order analysis, sway can also be assumed to be prevented.   If a second order analysis is not carried out, for cases where the stability index of any story, calculated by  considering the whole structural system, does not exceed the lim it given below, it can be assumed that  adequate stiffness exists in that story and that sway is prevented. The value to be used in Eq. (7.13) should be calculated using uncracked sections and the most critical of the  following load combinations:   Fd = 1.0G + 1.0Q + 1.0E   and   Fd = 1.0G + 1.3Q + 1.3W   7.6.2.2 - Effective Column Length   The column clear length is the distance between slabs, beams or other members providing lateral support to  the columns. If a drop panel or capital exists, the column clear length should be measured from the bottom  face of the drop panel or capital. In cases where more accurate analysis is not carried out, the column  effective length can be obtained by multiplying the column clear length with the "k" factor given below, which  is related to column end restraints. The column effective length factor "k" is defined for columns in nonsway  frames and for columns in sway frames, in Equations 7.14 and 7.15, respectively.   For columns in nonsway frames:  k = 0.7 + 0.05 ( a1 + a2 ) £ (0.85 + 0.05a1) £ 1,0   If no calculations are carried out for such columns, k should be taken as k=1.0.   For columns in sway frames:   If   am    <  2,    =  k  20  -  a  m  20  +  a  m  1  If am    ‡  2,     =  k  90  .  a+  m  1  (7.14)   (7.15)   In sway frames, k=2+0.3a shall be used for one end hinged columns. Here, a should be calculated at the  end which is not hinged.    "a" that appears in equations 7.14 and 7.15 is defined below.   29             
 In calculation of the a ratios, only beams in the direction of bending shall be considered. For beams the  cracked sectional moment of inertia and for columns the gross sectional moment of inertia should be used. If  a more reliable calculation cannot be carried out, the cracked sectional moment of inertia can be assumed  as half of the uncracked sectional moment of inertia. In calculation of the moment of inertia of T sections, the  flange should be considered as well.   When equation 7.16 is applied to flat slabs, column strips, which are depicted in Figure 11.2, should be  considered as beams.   7.6.2.3 - Cases where Slenderness Effect Can Be Ignored   When the slenderness ratio (lk/i) does not exceed the lim its given below, the slenderness effect can be  ignored and the design moment can be taken to be equal to the largest end moment that is obtained from  structural analysis. In slenderness ratio calculations, the radius of gyration of a rectangular column “i” can be  approximately taken as 30 percent of its dimension in the bending direction and the radius of gyration of a  circular column can be taken as 25 percent of its diameter. For the calculation of the radius of gyration for  other sections, the whole concrete section should be considered.   a)   For columns in nonsway frames, if the condition below is satisfied, the slenderness effect can be ignored. M1 and M2 are the column end moments that are obtained from  structural analyses for each load combination (M1£M2). If M1 and M2 lead to compression on the same  column face (single curvature column) the M1/M2 ratio should be positive, otherwise (double curvature  column) the M1/M2 ratio should be negative.   b)   For columns in sway frames, if the condition below is satisfied,   (lk /i)   £  22   (7.18)   the slenderness effect can be ignored.   7.6.2.4 - Buckling Load   The buckling load for columns is calculated by using the Euler equation.  The effective flexural stiffness of the column can be obtained by using equations given below, unless more  reliable calculations are carried out.  Here EcIc is the flexural stiffness of the gross concrete section, and EsIs is the flexural stiffness of the  longitudinal reinforcement relative to the center of gravity of the member.   In case of nonsway frames, the creep ratio Rm is the ratio of the portion of the axial load caused by sustained  loads to the total load.   d  gd  m  N  N  R  =  (7.22)   For sway frames, the creep ratio Rm is the ratio of the sum of the portion of the shear caused by sustained  loads to the story shear.               
31  story)  whole  the   7.6.2.5 - Moment Magnification Coefficient   a) Columns in nonsway frames:    Moment magnification factor b for the column shall be calculated using Eq. (7.24)   In case of columns bent in single curvature, the (M1/M2) ratio is positive, and in case of columns bent in  double curvature the (M1/M2) ratio is negative.    Here,  If any horizontal load is applied in between the column ends, Cm should be taken equal to 1.    The design moment can be obtained by using equation 7.26. The M2 value in this equation cannot be less  than the moment value that is defined in equation 6.16 considering m inimum eccentricity.   2  d  M  M  b=  (7.26)   b) Columns in a sway frame:  In sway frames, the moment magnification factor for the story, bs, can be calculated from Eq. (7.27).  SNd and SNk in this equation are the sum of the axial design loads that compression members in that story  carry and the sum of the critical column loads respectively. If the condition given below is not satisfied, the  column dimensions should be increased.     For each column in sway frames, the individual b value should be calculated as well. In calculating b , Cm  should be taken equal to 1.0. The larger of the b and bs values should be used in calculating the design  moment (the larger of Md = bM2 and bsM2). However in case of columns whose slenderness ratios are,   c  ck  d  k  A  f  N  35  i  >     l    (7.29)    the product of the b and bs should be used in calculating the moment (Md = bbsM2).   7.6.2.6 - Biaxial Bending   In case of compression members that are subjected to biaxial bending, moment values in both directions  should be magnified by b factors separately and the calculations should be based on these magnified  moment values.                   
8 - SHEAR AND TORSION   8.0 - NOTATION   TS 500    Web area of concrete section  Area enclosed by lines connecting the centroids of the reinforcing bars at the corners of the  section   Area enclosed by centre lines of walls in case of hollow box sections  Area of reinforcement required for resisting horizontal force in short cantilevers and brackets  Cross sectional area of stirrup bar  Cross sectional area of stirrups required for resisting shear (single bar)  Cross sectional area of stirrup required for resisting torsion (single bar)  Cross sectional area of reinforcement resisting bending  Cross sectional area of longitudinal reinforcement required for resisting torsion  Total cross sectional area of transverse reinforcement resisting bending and  Horizontal forces in brackets and short cantilevers  Cross sectional area of transverse reinforcement in the region between the top face and 2/3 of  the depth of the section in brackets and short cantilevers  Total cross sectional area of shear reinforcement  Cross sectional area of shear reinforcement perpendicular to tension   Reinforcement in deep beams  Cross sectional area of shear reinforcement parallel to tension reinforcement in deep beams  Cross sectional area of shear –friction reinforceme nt  Distance between loading point and support face in case of short cantilevers and brackets  Dimension of column cross section  Web width of beam  Dimensions of smallest possible rectangle enclosing critical punching perimeter (up)  Dimensions of critical punching perimeter (up) in x and y directions  In two way slabs average of effective depth  Effective height in case of bending members  Diameter of column or circular loading  Eccentricity in the direction of bending  Eccentricity in x and y directions  Sum of slab loads within critical punching perimeter (up)  Design compressive strength of concrete  Design axial tensile strength of concrete  Design yield strength of longitudinal reinforcement  Design yield strength of transverse reinforcement  Horizontal design force in brackets and short cantilevers  Total depth of beam  Cross sectional dimension of column in the direction of bending   Clear span length measured from one support face to the other   Axial design force  Axial loads of top and bottom columns in punching shear calculations  Plate design bending moments at column face  Number of stirrup arms at a section  Distributed slab load  Base soil reaction  Shape factor in torsion  Spacing of shear reinforcement parallel to tension reinforcement in a deep beam  Stirrup spacing  Cracking strength of section under pure torsion  Design torsional moment  Wall thickness of a hollow box section  Perimeter of area Ae  critical punching perimeter (at a distance d/2 from loaded area)  Contribution of concrete to shear strength  Cracking shear strength of the section   Design shear force  Design punching shear force   Ac  Ae   An  Ao  Aov  Aot  As  Asl   Ast      Asv   Asw  Av   Avh  Awf  av  b  bw  b1,b2   bx,by  d   do  e  ex,ey  Fa  fcd   fctd  fyd    fywd    Hd  h   ln    Nd  N1,N2    Md1,Md2    n  p  qsp  S  sh  s  Tcr  Td  te  ue  up  Vc  Vcr  Vd    Vpd    32               
Total shear force at ith storey  Punching shear strength  Shear strength  Contribution of shear reinforcement to shear strength   Section modulus of area within critical punching perimeter (up)  Short and long side lengths of rectangles making up a flanged section in case of torsion  calculations  Smaller angle made by shear – friction reinforceme nt with the shear plane  Coefficient showing effect of axial force on cracking shear strength  Coefficient showing effect of bending on punching shear  A coefficient used in punching shear calculations  Shear – friction coefficient  Poisson ratio for concrete  Diameter of circular section (Diameter of largest circle inscribable in a polygonal section)   Diameter of smallest longitudinal reinforcement   8.1 -  DESIGN FOR SHEAR   8.1.1 - General   The principal tensile stresses developed when flexural moment and shear forces act together on reinforced  concrete structural members, will be resisted by concrete and suitable shear reinforcement, and the principal  compressive stresses developed will be maintained at such a level that no crushing will occur.   8.1.2 -  Location of Critical Section for Shear   The design shear force Vd shall be calculated at a distance "d" away from the face of the support. However,  when the beam support is provided by another flexural member (indirect support), the shear force at the face  of the support should be considered in the design calculations.   Supporting beam  (Hanger reinforcement  is required) Section of design  shear force   Section of design  shear force   Hanger  reinforcement   a. Direct support   b. Indirect support   Figure 8.1 Different Supports Types   When there is a possibility of a point load acting at a distance "d" away from the support face or at a nearer  distance, the shear force at the support face should be used in the design calculations.   8.1.3 - Diagonal Cracking Strength   The shear cracking strength of a reinforced concrete section can be obtained from the equation below unless  more detailed calculations are used. The design axial load Nd is positive in this equation whether it is a  compressive or a tensile force.      
In the case of axial compression, g should be taken as g=0.07. In the case of axial tension, g should be taken  as g=-0.3. When the axial tensile stress calculated is lower than 0.5 MPa, g can be taken as zero.   8.1.4 - Shear Strength   For the safe shear design of sections, the following condition must be satisfied:   Vr ‡Vd   (8.2)   The design shear force Vd that appears in the equation above is calculated according to Clause 8.1.2. Vr is  the shear strength of section. The shear strength of the section under consideration is the sum of the shear  strength provided by the concrete (Vc) and the shear strength provided by the shear reinforcement (Vw):   Vr = Vc + Vw   In the general contribution of concrete to shear strength is calculated from Equation 8.4:   Vc = 0.8Vcr   (8.3)    (8.4)    Under seism ic load combinations, for confined regions at the ends of the member, Vc values given in  ”Specifications for Structures to be Built in Disas ter Areas ” should be used.   The contribution of stirrups to shear strength can be calculated by using equation 8.5:  If the design shear force is equal to or less than diagonal cracking strength (Vd£Vcr), there is no need to  calculate the shear reinforcement. However, in such cases, the m inimum stirrups, specified in Clause 8.1.5a,  shall still be provided.   8.1.5 -  Prevention of Brittle Failure   a) Minimum Shear Reinforcement   Stirrups must be provided along the whole length of reinforced concrete beams. Stirrups provided should  satisfy Equation 8.6.   Upper Limit for the Design Shear   To prevent crushing of web concrete due to high principal compressive stresses, the design shear force  should be lim ited as below. If this requirement is not satisfied, the beam dimensions should be increased.   Vd £0.22fcd bw d   8.1.6 - Shear Reinforcement Details   (8.7)   To provide the required shear strength, individual reinforcing bars (vertical and horizontal stirrups, hair pins,,  cross-ties etc.) and mesh reinforcement can be used. The contribution of bent bars to shear strength should  be neglected. The stirrup spacing should not exceed half of the effective beam depth (s£d/2). Also when  Vd>3Vcr the stirrup should not exceed half of the value given above (s£d/4). At the ends of frame beams over  a length equal to twice the beam depth, the spacing of stirrups should satisfy the following requirements:   s £ d/4   s £8f s £ 150 mm   l  Requirements for columns are given in Section 7.    When supports are arranged at a level higher than the bottom face of beams or when a beam is supported  by another beam, reinforcement should be provided and detailed to transfer the shear force to the top of the  beam.   8.1.7 - Shear-Friction   The principles and provisions of this section are to be applied in the shear strength calculations and  reinforcement detailing for an interface between dissim ilar materials, or between the surfaces two concretes  cast at different times. For shear-friction, a crack should be assumed to exist along the shear plane under   34               
consideration. For shear-fiction, Equation 8.2 should also be satisfied. Vr  calculated as shown below:   in   this equation should be   Vr = Awf fyd m   (8.8)   In this equation, shear-friction reinforcement area (Awf) is equal to the sum of the cross sectional areas of  reinforcing bars placed perpendicular to the shear plane only. Values of m, the shear-friction coefficient, for  different cases are given in Table 8.1.   Table 8.1 Shear-Friction Coefficients for Different Cases   Monolithically cast concrete   Roughened surface at interface between hardened concrete  and new concrete (roughness amplitude  ‡ 5 mm)   Unroughened surface   Interface between steel section and concrete   m = 1.4   m = 1.0   m = 0.6   m = 0.7   When the shear-friction reinforcement is inclined to the shear plane, such that the component of shear force  parallel to the reinforcement tends to produce tension in the reinforcement, Vr should be calculated using the  equation given below.   When compression develops in the reinforcement due to the shear force, this reinforcement should be  considered  to be  ineffective. For earthquake  loading, reinforcement should be arranged so  that  it  is  perpendicular to the shear plane. The angle af in Equation 8.9 is the smaller angle made by the shear-friction  reinforcement with the shear plane.   Shear-friction shall not be allowed to exceed the lim it given below, and for the calculation of this lim it, the  design compressive strength of concrete should not be taken greater than 25 MPa.   Vd £ 0.2 fcd Ac.   If tension forces exist across the shear plane, they should be resisted by additional reinforcement which is  sufficiently anchored on both sides of shear plane. The  total cross sectional area of shear-friction  reinforcement may be reduced in accordance with the m inimum value of any permanent compressive force  acting across the shear plane.   8.2 - SHEAR AND TORSION   8.2.1 - General   In case of structural members subjected to torsion, shear and flexure, the resulting principal tensile stresses  should be resisted by providing adequate reinforcement, and compressive stresses should be kept at such a  level that crushing of concrete will not occur.   In structural systems, torsion is divided into two classes; (a) equilibrium torsion and (b) compatibility torsion  (Section 0.2).    8.2.2 - Diagonal Cracking Limit   When shear force exists together with a torsional moment, the diagonal cracking lim it should be calculated  by using the equation given below. should be obtained from equation 8.1. Tcr should be calculated from the equation given below:    Tcr = 1.35 fctd S   (8.10)   (8.11)   S in equation 8.11 is the shape factor, and when precise calculations are not carried out, S can be taken  from Table 8.2.   35          
Table 8.2 Nom inal torsional moment strength values for different cross sections   Rectangular sections    Flanged Sections   Circular or convex polygonal sections   S = bw  2 h/3   S = S x2 y/3   S= pf3/12.   Thin walled (if te<x/5) hollow box sections   S = 2Aete    “x ” and “y” in Table 8.2 are the short and long sid es of rectangles making up the flanged section. In these  calculations, the width of the overhanging flange extending from the web face cannot be taken greater than  three times the flange thickness.   8.2.3 -  Design Forces   Design shear forces should be calculated in accordance with section 8.1.2. In cases where equilibrium  torsion exists, the design torsional moments should be calculated by using elastic structural analysis. The  design torsional moment calculated should not be reduced in calculating the cross-sectional dimensions. In  the case of compatibility torsion, there is no need to calculate the torsional moment, as it can be assumed to  be equal to the cracking moment. In case of compatibility torsion, providing the minimum amount of stirrups,  calculated by using equation 8.17, is adequate.   Td = Tcr  (compatibility torsion)   (8.12)   When Td is less than given by Td £ 0.65 fctd S, torsion can be neglected. When this is the case, the m inimum  amount of stirrups for shear only calculated using Equation 8.6 is adequate.   8.2.4 - Strength   If the design shear force and the torsional moment satisfy Equation 8.10, there is no need to calculate the  stirrups. However, the m inimum amount of stirrups and longitudinal reinforcements given in section 8.2.5  must be provided. If the design shear force and torsional moment do not satisfy Equation 8.10, the required  reinforcement should be calculated by using the equations given below:   A  o  s  A  ov  s  A  ot  s  =  A  ov  s  +  A  ot  s  =  =  (V  d  -  )V  c  d  n f  ywd  T  d   A2  e   f  ywd  (8.13)   (8.14)   (8.15)   When there is more than one stirrup in a given section, the contribution of the inner stirrup legs should not be  considered in the torsional resistance. When torsion exists, the cross sectional area of stirrups surrounding  an area Ae cannot be less than Aot. Longitudinal bars having the same volume of stirrups should be provided  as given in Equation 8.16.   =l  A  s  A  ot  s    u  e  f  ywd  f  yd  (8.16)   Longitudinal reinforcement that is required to resist bending and axial forces should be calculated separately  and should be provided in addition to the longitudinal reinforcement for resisting torsion mentioned above.  The calculated stirrup and longitudinal reinforcement cross sectional areas cannot be less than the m inimum  values given in Clause 8.2.5.a.    In case of compatibility torsion, providing the m inimum amount of reinforcement given in Clause 8.2.5.a is  adequate. However this reinforcement cannot be less than the amount of reinforcement required for shear  resistance.   36                   
8.2.5 - Prevention of Brittle Failure   a) Minimum Reinforcement   The m inimum amount of stirrup and longitudinal reinforcement as given below must be provided to prevent  brittle failure due to principal tensile stresses.   Minimum Stirrups:   ‡  15.0  A  o  s  f  ctd  f  ywd      +  1  3.1  T  d  bV  d  w  b      w  (8.17)   In Equation 8.17, Td/Vdbw should not be taken greater than 1.0. For compatibility torsion, Td can be taken be  equal to Tcr.    Minimum Longitudinal Bars:    =l  A  s  uT  d  e  f2  A  e  yd  (8.18)   b) Upper Limit   To prevent crushing of concrete due to high principal compressive stresses, the load effects have been  lim ited as given below. If this condition is not satisfied, the beam dimensions should be increased.       T  d  S  +  £  V  d  b  w  d      22.0  f  cd  8.2.6 - Reinforcement Details   (8.19)   In cases where shear forces and torsional moments act together, the stirrups and longitudinal reinforcements  to be provided should satisfy the requirements given below.   When torsion cannot be ignored, stirrups having lapped 900 hooks at the ends shall not be used. Instead,  closed stirrups with 135o hooks should be used and stirrup ends should be anchored within the core. The  stirrup spacing should not exceed the lim its given below.   s £ d/2   s £ ue/2  s £ 300 mm   Longitudinal reinforcement required to resist torsion should be distributed around the circumference of the  section and the diameter of bars to be placed at each corner of the section should not be less than 12mm.  The distance between longitudinal reinforcing bars should not exceed 300mm.   8.3 - PUNCHING SHEAR   8.3.1 - Punching Shear Strength   The punching shear strength of slabs loaded over a lim ited area or by means of columns should be  calculated and the punching shear strength should be shown to be equal to or higher than the calculated  design value.   Vpr ‡ Vpd   (8.20)   In punching shear strength calculations, the cross sectional area enclosed by the critical perimeter, located  at a distance d/2 away from the loaded area should be considered (see Figure 8.2). The design punching  shear force is the algebraic sum of forces perpendicular to slab, Figure 8.2. Fa shown in the figure is the sum  of slab loads acting on the area enclosed by the critical perimeter (slab loading for slabs and soil pressure for  footings).   The punching shear strength Vpr shall be calculated by using the equation given below.  Vpr = g fctd up d   (8.21)   g in this equation is a coefficient reflecting the bending effect. Unless the effect of unbalanced column  moments transferred to the slab has been obtained by carrying out more reliable calculations, the shear due  to bending moments should be considered in calculations by using the coefficients g given below.   37          
38   Figure 8.2 Punching area properties and design punching shear   In case of axial loading, g =1.0   In case of eccentric loading,  Equation 8.23 is only applicable when b2 ‡ 0.7b1.  When rectangular or circular loading areas (or columns) are not near edges or corners of the slabs, g can be  expressed by means of simpler equations.   C  r  a  k c  N  1  5  4  0  q  s  p  d  d 2  /  d 2  /  b  +  d  b  h d  h  +  V  d p  = =  N  1  - (  F  a  F  a  q  s  p  b  +  d  ( )  h  +  d  b  )  .  F  o o  t  i  g n  C  r  i  t  i  c  a  l  s  e  c  t  i  n o  C  r  a  k c  N  1  N  2  d  p  d  d 2  /  d  /  2  b  h  b d  +  h d  +  C  r  i  t  i  c  a  l  s  e  c  t  i  n o  V  d p  =  N  2  -  N  1  -  F  a  F  a  =  p  (  b  +  d  ( )  h  +  d  )   a  .  F  l  a  t  s  l  b a  5  4  0                                                                                                
For rectangular loading areas or rectangular columns   For circular loading areas or circular columns     Eccentricities in Equations 8.22, 8.24 and 8.25 should be based on 40 percent of the algebraic sum of the  slab moments acting in the direction of bending, together with the difference of axial loads in the columns  below and above the plate. The eccentricity calculation is depicted in Figure 8.3.   N1   +  M  )  2d  e =  e  =  .  (  0.4(M  M40 + N -  d1  N  2  N  2  1  1d  )M  d2  -  N  1  Md1   Md2   Md2 > Md1   N2   Figure 8.3 Eccentricity to be used in the calculations   Holes that are located at distances of 5d or less from an edge of the loading area should be considered in  critical perimeter calculations. The critical perimeter up should be reduced due to these holes by subtracting  that portion of the critical perimeter lying within radial lines connecting the center of gravity of the load area to  the hole edges as shown in Figure 8.4.a.   When the aspect ratio of the loaded area is greater than 3, the critical perimeter should be calculated  assum ing h=3b as shown in Figure 8.4b.   When the loading area has re-entrant corners (a T shape), it is possible to ignore the resulting concavity by  making use of suitable tangents as shown in Figure 8.4c and using the resulting circumscribing line as the  critical perimeter. When columns or loaded areas are near slab edges, the critical perimeter should be the  smaller of the two options shown in Fig.8.5.a.    When columns or loaded areas are near slab corners, the critical perimeter should be the smaller of the two  options shown in Fig.8.5b.   If more than one critical section exists, (e.g. if the column has a drop-panel or column capital) each one of  them should be considered separately and the most unfavorable case should be selected from among them  as the most critical perimeter.   8.3.2 - Punching Shear Reinforcement   The punching shear strength obtained from Equation 8.21 can be increased by using suitable reinforcement  or arrangements of steel sections or special steel elements  if such  increase has been validated by  experiments. However for punching shear reinforcement to be effective, the slab thickness must be at least  250 mm. Also the punching shear strength augmented in this manner cannot exceed 1.5 times the value  obtained by using Equation 8.21.    39                        
b. Rectangular section with large aspect ratio   c. Column with concave section   Figure 8.4 Critical section for special conditions   Free edge   Free edge   d/ 2   d/ 2   d/ 2   d/ 2   (a) Two options for edge columns   Free edge   Free edge   d/ 2   d/ 2   d/ 2   (b) Two options for corner columns   Figure 8.5 Critical perimeters for edge and corner columns   40                    
8.4 - BRACKETS AND SHORT CANTILEVERS   The ultimate capacity and reinforcement for brackets and short cantilevers with shear span to depth ratio  (ratio of the distance between the support and the loaded point to the effective section depth) equal to or less  than unity (av £ d) should be calculated in accordance with the principles of this Section.   When special measures are not taken, the elongations and contractions produced by temperature changes  and shrinkage results in the development of horizontal forces in brackets and short cantilevers. For this  horizontal force the load factor should be taken as 1.6. This force is always tensile and cannot be taken as  less than 0.2 Vd. The design shear strength of brackets and short cantilevers should not exceed the value  obtained by using Equation 8.26. A friction-shear calculation should be carried out for brackets and short  cantilevers and the required friction shear reinforcement (Awf) should be calculated according to Clause  8.1.7.   £  V  d  0  .  22  f  b  w  d  cd  (8.26)   The total tension reinforcement area (Ast), is the sum of the cross sectional areas of reinforcing bars resisting  both bending and the horizontal force (Hd), Figure 8.6.   (  =  A  s  +  A  n  A  st  ‡  0  .  05  f  f  cd  yd  )  ‡      2  3  b  w  d  A  wf  +  A  n      =  A  s  V  d  a  v  +  H  d  (h  -  d)  f8.0  d  yd  =  A  n  H  d  f  yd  (8.27)   (8.28)   (8.29)   The cross sectional area Asv of closed and open transverse reinforcement arranged in the region between  the top face and 2/3rd of the effective depth "d" of the section in case of brackets and short cantilevers  cannot be less than the value given below.   (8.30)   ‡  A  sv  (  A50  .  -  st  )n  A  Tension reinforcement should have sufficient anchorage to enable yielding to occur. To achieve this, the  primary tension reinforcement should either be suitably welded to an anchoring bar of diameter not less than  that of the smallest tensile reinforcing bar (Figure 8.6) or the tensile reinforcement must comprise U shaped  hairpin bars. The anchor bar or the bottom part of the hairpin should project beyond the loaded area.   8.5 - SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR DEEP BEAMS   The provisions and lim its of this section apply to the shear design of beams with clear span (between  support and loaded tip) to depth ratio less than 5. Members that are loaded and supported on the same face  should be designed according to Section 8.1. The design shear force shall be calculated at a distance of   0.15 ln from the support for uniform ly loaded beams and at a distance of 0.5a from the support for beams  with concentrated loads but in no case should this distance exceed the beam effective depth. Here, "a" is the  distance of the concentrated load from the support face.   The contribution of concrete to shear strength should be calculated using Equations 8.4 and 8.1.   The design shear force calculated as described above cannot exceed the lim its given below. If these  requirements are not satisfied, the dimensions of the section should be increased.   If (ln / d) < 2; then Vd  £ 0.20 fcd bwd   If 2 £ (ln / d) £ 5; then Vd  £ 0.017 fcd bwd (10 + ln / d)   (8.31)   (8.32)   When the design shear force exceeds the design cracking strength obtained by using Equation 8.1, the  amount of shear reinforcement to be placed perpendicular and parallel to the axis of the beam should be  calculated by using the Equation 8.33. The concrete contribution Vc should be calculated by using Equation  8.4.   41                             
Primary reinforcement, (Ast)   2d/3   Closed stirrups, (Asv)   Figure 8.6 Notation for short cantilever    Av in this equation is the area of transverse shear reinforcement placed perpendicular to the beam axis with  spacing "s". Avh is the area of longitudinal shear reinforcement placed parallel to the beam axis with spacing  "sh" over the beam depth.    The calculated shear reinforcement areas shall not be less than the values given below.   A  v  s  A  sh  s  h  ‡  80  .  ‡  80  .  f  ctd  f  ywd  f  f  ctd  yd  b  w  b  w  (8.34)   (8.35)   The spacing of reinforcement being placed perpendicular and parallel to the beam axis shall exceed neither  d/5 nor 400 mm.   42            
9 - RULES / SPECIFICATIONS FOR ANCHORAGE AND PLACEMENT OF REINFORCEMENT   9.0 -  NOTATION   a  c  cc   fctd  fyd    dm   fyk   lb   lbk   lo   n   r  a1   f   fe   Spacing of hairpin bars  Concrete cover measured from center of gravity of outermost reinforcing bar  Clear concrete cover  Design tensile strength of concrete  Design yield strength of longitudinal reinforcement  Diameter of roller around which the bar is bent  Characteristic yield strength of longitudinal reinforcement   Development length   Development length with hooked end   Lap splice length  Number of reinforcing bars in a bundle  Number of transverse reinforcing bars in mesh reinforcement  Ratio of spliced reinforcement to total reinforcement at a given section  Lap splice length coefficient  Diameter of longitudinal reinforcement (if different bar sizes used, the largest bar diameter)  Equivalent diameter in case of bundled bars   9.1 -  DEVELOPMENT OF REINFORCEMENT   9.1.2 - General   For a reinforced concrete structural member to behave as required, it is necessary that the reinforcement be  fully anchored into concrete. The development length required to achieve complete bond depends on the  position of the reinforcing bars during concrete casting.   CASE I: General situation (All bars not in Case II)   CASE II: Reinforcing bars making an angle of 45o-90o with the horizontal during casting as well as reinforcing  bars in the lower half of the section or at least 300 mm away from the upper face of the section  which are horizontal or which make an angle less than 45o with the horizontal during casting.   For a reinforced concrete member at any section to be able to resist the required tensile or compressive  stresses safely, the reinforcement should have adequate development length in both directions. Anchorage  can be achieved by providing development length, sleeves or other sim ilar mechanical devices or by  providing hooks.   9.1.3 - Development of Reinforcing Bars in Tension   a)    Straight Embedment    Anchorage can be achieved by extending the reinforcing bars a distance of lb beyond the point where the  stress in the bar is maximum. This length is defined as the development length, and for deformed bars the  development length shall be calculated using Equation 9.1.   In case of plain bars, twice this value should be taken as the development length.   When the diameter f of the reinforcement is 32 mm < f£ 40 mm, the development length value obtained  from equation 9.1 should be increased by multiplying it by 100/(132-f).   Development length values, obtained from equation 9.1, should be multiplied by 1.4 when bars conform to  Case 1.   When  the amount of  reinforcement provided  in a section  is greater  than  the  required amount,  the  development length calculated using Equation 9.1 can be reduced by multiplying it with the ratio of the  amount of required reinforcement to the amount of available reinforcement at the section. However the  development length reduced by this method cannot be less either than half of the value calculated using  Equation 9.1 or 20f. In case of earthquake resistant high ductility frame members and for the critical heights  in shear walls as described in “Specifications for Structures to be Built in Disaster Areas ”, the deve lopment  length shall not be reduced. When the concrete cover is less than the diameter of the reinforcing bars or the  clear spacing between reinforcing bars in a layer is smaller than one and a half times the diameter of the   43          
TURKISH STANDARD   reinforcing bars,  the development  multiplying them by 1.2.   lengths calculated by using Equation 9.1 should be   increased by   TS 500    Straight embedment is only allowed in case of deformed reinforcing bars.   b) Development with Hooks or Hairpin Reinforcement    The development length can be reduced for reinforcing bars which have hooked ends and for hairpins. If the  standard hooks shown in Figure 9.1 are used, the development length can be reduced to ¾ of the value  calculated from Equation 9.1.   ‡12f   dm   lbk   ‡6f   ‡60 mm   dm   dm ‡ 6f   lbk   (a)   dm   lbk   (c)   Fs   Fs   Fs   Fs   width of the  member   (b)   Hair pin   a   a   c   (d)   Longitudinal bar, tie and cross-tie hooks: dm ‡ 6f   Hair pins: dm‡12f, a‡2f, c‡3f   c)    Development with Welded Transverse Bars   Figure 9.1 Hooked bar details   The required development length can be achieved by welding transverse bars to the reinforcement. This  type of development is used widely in case of spot-welded mesh reinforcement.    The number of  transverse bars and  their m inimum dimensions, which are  required  for adequate  development, are given in Table 9.1 for spot welded mesh reinforcement. In case of dynam ic or frequently  changing loading, the number of bars should be increased by one and 100mm should be added to the length  given in Table 9.1.   Table 9.1 Anchorage Requirements for Welded Transverse Bars   Bar Type   Plain   Deformed   f   (mm)   f < 8.5   f ‡ 8.5   f < 8.5   f ‡ 8.5   Case I   Case II   n   3   4   3   3   lb   (mm)   450   500   350   450   n   3   4   3   3   lb   (mm)   350   400   300   350   44         
TURKISH STANDARD   d) Mechanical Anchorage   TS 500    Under special conditions, reinforcement can develop the required anchorage strength by the welding or  bolting of steel plates to the end of the reinforcing bar. Under such circumstances, the envisaged mechanical  anchorage should be tested in a laboratory and the design reinforcement force should not exceed 70 percent  of the ultimate fracture load value obtained from the tests. Before using such anchorage, special perm ission  needs to be obtained.   Mechanical anchorage can be achieved by using special bolts. Bolts to be used should be proved to be  adequate with tests.   e)    Development of Bundled Bars   In calculating the development length for bundled bars, the equivalent reinforcement diameter fe as defined  in Equation 9.3 should be used.   9.1.4 - Development of Reinforcing Bars in Compression   No hooks are perm itted at  the ends of  reinforcing bars  in compression.  If  the  reinforcing bar  is  in  compression under all load combinations, the development length obtained from Equation 9.1, can be  reduced to up to 75 percent of the calculated length.   9.1.5 - Development of Stirrups   Hooks, straight overlaps or welded transverse bars can be used to provide development length in case of  stirrups.    a)    Development with Hooks   Such development should be with 90o or 135o hooks as shown in Figure 9.2. The hook type shown in  Fig.9.2a can be used in rectangular sections, columns and members subjected to torsion. The hook type  shown in Fig.9.2b can only be used in ribbed slabs.   b) Development with Straight Laps   Straight overlaps such as shown in Figure 9.2c cannot be used in structural members which may be  subjected to earthquake or torsion effects.   ‡ 10 f  ‡ 70 mm   ≥ 6 f  ≥ 50 mm   lb   (a)   (b)   (c)   Figure 9.2  Different anchorage types for stirrups   c) Development with Welded Transverse Bars   For stirrups, this type of development can only be achieved with mesh reinforcement. Different anchorage  techniques are shown in Figure 9.3.   45          
TURKISH STANDARD   TS 500    a‡4f   a‡4f   ‡ 3 gaps  ‡ 300 mm   a‡4f   (a)   (b)   (c)   Figure 9.3 Welded splice types for stirrups   9.2 - SPLICING OF REINFORCEMENT   9.2.1 - General   Design drawings should illustrate locations of reinforcement splices and the manner in which they should be  produced. Any alterations to be made must be approved by the design engineer.   The following procedures for splicing the reinforcing bars are perm itted.   9.2.2 - Lap Splices   In lap splices it is preferable to have the spliced bars in contact. If it is necessary to leave a gap between the  two spliced bars, this gap should not exceed neither 1/6 of the required lap splice length, nor 100 mm.   When bundled reinforcing bars are spliced, all the splices should not be located at the same section. The lap  splice lengths of bars in a bundle should be obtained by increasing the lap splice lengths required for  individual bars within the bundle, (obtained from Clause 9.2.5), by 20 percent.   9.2.3 - Mechanical Connections (Sleeves)   Sleeve connections to be used for splicing in reinforced concrete structural members should be tested both  in tension and compression and the bar spliced with the sleeve should be proven to have a strength of 1.25  times the m inimum characteristic yield strength envisaged in the standard.   9.2.4 - Welded Splices   The metallurgical analysis of reinforcing bars to be welded should be conducted and the steel carbon content  should especially be checked to prove that it is suitable for welding.   Tension tests should be carried out on one out of every fifty welded splices (at least five specimens). These  tests should prove that welded splices can reach a strength of 1.25 times the minimum characteristic yield  stress fyk.   9.2.5 - Splices of Reinforcing Bars in Tension   a)   Lap Splices   The lap splice length lo in the case of lap spliced bars should be calculated using Equation 9.2.   =  =  l  o  a  1  a l  b  1  +  1  r50  .  (9.2)   Here "r" is the ratio of spliced reinforcement to total reinforcement at that section. For members where the  whole section is in tension, a1 is taken as a1 = 1.8. In case of bars that are classified as Case 1, the length lo  should be magnified by multiplying it with 1.4.   If the ends of bars being lap spliced are hooked, the lap splice length can be reduced to three-quarters of the  calculated length.    Confining hoop reinforcement should be provided along  the  lap splice  length. The diameter of hoop  reinforcement should be at least 1/3 of the diameter of the reinforcing bar being lap spliced and should not  be less than 8 mm. At least six hoops should be present along the lap splice length. The spacing of the  confinement reinforcement cannot be more either than ¼ of the member depth or 200 mm.   46            
TURKISH STANDARD   TS 500    If more than one bar has to be spliced, splices should be staggered. W hen the distance between the   m idpoints of two individual bar splices is at least 1.5 lo, those splices are considered to be staggered.   Table 9.2, which is recommended for the lap splicing of mesh reinforcement, is only applicable for cases  where at the section at least 50 percent more reinforcement has been provided than is required. When the  ratio of area of reinforcement provided in the section to the area of reinforcement required is less than 1.5,  the lap splice lengths and number of transverse bars given in Table 9.2 should be increased in the proportion  (1.5·required reinforcement cross-sectional area ‚ cross-sectional area of reinforcement provided at the  section).   Table 9.2 Lap splicing requirements for spot-welded mesh reinforcements   Bar Type   Plain   Deformed   f (mm)   f < 8.5  f ‡ 8.5  f < 8.5  f ‡ 8.5   Case I   Case II   n   4   5   4   4   lo (mm)  500   600   400   450   n   4   5   4   4   lo (mm)  400   500   350   400   b) Mechanical Connections   Mechanical connections (sleeves) for splicing of reinforcing bars in tension should be designed according to  Clause 9.2.3.   c) Welded Splices   Welded splices of reinforcing bars in tension should be designed according to Clause 9.2.4.   9.2.6 - Splices of Reinforcing Bars in Compression   a)   Lap Splices   The lap splice length for bars in compression shall not be less than the development length that is defined in  Clause 9.1.2a nor less than 300 mm. No hooks shall be provided at the ends of lap spliced reinforcing bars  resisting compression. The spacing of confining hoop reinforcement along the lap splice length, which is  defined in Clause 9.2.5a, should not be less than d/4.   Reinforcing bars with diameters larger than 30mm shall not be lap spliced. These reinforcing bars should be  spliced with special mechanical connectors (sleeves) whose adequacy has been proven by tests.   b) Mechanical connectors for reinforcing bars in compression should be designed according to  Clause 9.2.3.   c) Welded Splices   Welded splices of reinforcing bars in compression should be designed according to Clause 9.2.4.   9.2.7 - Lap Spliced Longitudinal Column Bars   c)   If the longitudinal reinforcing bars are being lap spliced in the m iddle region of the column, the relation  l0o‡ lb should be satisfied.   d) If under all load combinations no tension develops in the column longitudinal bars the lap splices can be  designed according to Clause 9.2.6.   e) If tension develops under the same load combination in the column longitudinal bars and if such bars are  lap spliced at the bottom end of the column, then the conditions given below should be satisfied.   If half or less than half of column longitudinal bars are being lap spliced, lo ‡ 1.25 lb.   If more than half of column longitudinal bars are being lap spliced, lo ‡ 1.5 lb.   9.3 - STANDARD HOOK DETAILS   Standard hook types defined in this standard are shown in Figure 9.1.   47      
TURKISH STANDARD   TS 500    9.3.1 - Hooks in Longitudinal Reinforcement    a) 180o hook - As shown in Figure 9.1a, this type of standard hook makes an angle of 180 degrees with the  reinforcing bar axis. At the free end of the hook, there should be a straight portion which is not shorter  either than 4 bar diameters or 60 mm. The inner diameter of the hook, dm, cannot be less than 6 bar  diameters.   b) 90o hook - As shown in Figure 9.1b, this type of standard hook makes an angle of 90 degrees with the  reinforcing bar axis. At the free end of the hook, there should be a straight portion which is not shorter  than 12 bar diameters. The inner diameter of the hook, dm, cannot be less than 6 bar diameters.   c) Hairpin hook - This type of standard hook is shown in Figure 9.1c. The inner diameter, dm , of hairpin  hooks should not be less than 12 bar diameters.    9.3.2 - Stirrup Hooks   a) 135o hook - This type of standard stirrup hook is shown in Figure 9.2a.   b) 90o hook - This type of standard stirrup hook is shown in Figure 9.2b (can not be used in members  resisting seism ic action).   c) 90o straight lap hook - This type of standard stirrup hook is shown in Figure 9.2c. In case of stirrups with  straight laps, lap lengths should be taken to be equal to development lengths calculated by using  Equation 9.1. This stirrup type cannot be used in members resisting seism ic action.   The inner diameters of stirrup hooks cannot be less than 4 bar diameters.   9.3.3 - Stirrup Hooks made up of Mesh Reinforcement   Stirrup hooks of mesh reinforcement are made as shown in Figures 9.3a, b and c.   9.4 - REGULATIONS FOR BENDING REINFORCING BARS   Longitudinal reinforcement should be bent without being heated around a roller that has a diameter of at  least 6 bar diameters. By carrying out bending tests in accordance with TS708 it should be proved that the  reinforcing bars under consideration are suitable for bending.    Bent reinforcing bars should not be straightened after concrete has been placed. If straightening is needed  unavoidably, it should be carried out by using a roller of at least 6f diameter with the approval of the  engineer in charge.   9.5 - REGULATIONS FOR PLACEMENT OF REINFORCING BARS   9.5.1 - Clear Concrete Cover   Values for clear concrete cover required to provide necessary bond to the reinforcement and to protect it  from external effects are given in Table 9.3 (measured from the external surface of the outermost reinforcing  bar).   When the possibility of fire, rust (corrosion) and other harmful external effects exists, concrete cover should  be increased by the amount considered necessary.   Table 9.3 Required Concrete Cover from External Surface of Outermost Reinforcing Bar   In members which are in direct contact with the soil   Exterior columns and beams open to the atmosphere   Interior columns and beams not open to external effects   In shear walls and slabs   In shells and folded plates   cc ‡ 50 mm   cc ‡ 25 mm   cc ‡ 20 mm   cc ‡ 15 mm   cc ‡ 15 mm   9.5.2 - Spacing of Reinforcing Bars   The clear spacing of reinforcing bars in the same layer should not be less either than the diameter of the  reinforcing bar or 4/3 times the nom inal maximum coarse aggregate size or less than 25 mm. These lim its  are also applicable in locations where lap splices exist.   48      
TURKISH STANDARD   TS 500    When there is more than one layer of reinforcement, the reinforcing bars in the upper layer should be aligned  on top of the reinforcing bars in the lower layer. The clear spacing between the two layers should be at least  25 mm or one bar diameter.   In columns, the clear spacing between two longitudinal reinforcing bars should not be less either than 1.5  times the reinforcing bar diameter or 4/3 times nom inal the maximum coarse aggregate size or less than 40  mm.   9.5.3 - Bundled Bars    Only deformed bars can be used as bundled bars (as shown in Figure 9.4). The maximum number of  reinforcing bars in a bundle can be three.   The equivalent diameter fe for bundled bars is given in Equation 9.3. f is the diameter of the reinforcing bars  in the bundle and n is number of reinforcing bars in the bundle.   f  e  =  f  21  .  n  (9.3)   Regulations given in section 9.1 and 9.2 are also applicable for bundled bars with the provision that fe be  used instead of f.    fe   f   fe   f   n=2   n=3   Figure 9.4 Arrangement of bundled bars   9.5.4 - Placement of Reinforcing Bars   Before placing, reinforcing bars should be cleaned and rendered free of dirt, oil and surface rust. Care  should be taken to ensure that reinforcement is placed in accordance with the design drawings. Primary  reinforcement (tension and compression) should be tied up properly with distribution reinforcement and  stirrups.   While casting concrete, precautions should be taken so that reinforcement will not change its position. To  achieve the required concrete layer around the reinforcing bars, concrete spacers should be placed between  the formwork and reinforcing bars, and small steel rods should be placed as spacers between two layers of  reinforcing bars. Instead of concrete spacers and steel rods, plastic blocks manufactured for this purpose  may be used. Special care should be taken that stirrups are laterally covered completely by concrete. For  slabs and beams, measures should be  taken  to prevent  the  top  reinforcing bars  from being  forced  downwards.   In case of structural members which have bottom reinforcement and will be placed directly on soil (as in  foundation slabs), at least 50 mm of concrete cover or sim ilar insulating layer should be provided between  the soil and the structural member, considering the soil conditions.   49          
TURKISH STANDARD   TS 500    10 - REINFORCED CONCRETE FOOTINGS   10.0 - NOTATION   b  d   l  Vcr  Vd    W idth of footing supporting the wall  Average of effective depth     Projecting length of the footing measured from the face of a wall or column  Cracking strength of section under shear  Design shear force   10.1 - GENERAL   The provisions of this section apply to the design and construction of wall footings, isolated footings and  continuous footings, which transfer the superstructure load to the earth. Special footings are out of the scope  of this section. The footing level and type should be determ ined in accordance with the principles of soil  mechanics after evaluating  local conditions.  In calculating  the size of  the  footing  that will  lim it soil  deformations under loads and will also ensure footing stability, all the load factors defined in the load  combinations in Clause 6.2.6 will be taken as 1.0. In checking the section dimensions and in reinforcement  calculations, the base reactions resulting from design loads found using the load factors defined in Clause  6.2.6 will be used.    The concrete cover of footings designed according to be provisions of this section should not be less than  50mm.   10.2 - FOOTINGS SUPPORTING WALLS   10.2.1 - General Principles   Reinforced concrete wall footings should be designed to transfer the loads of structural walls safely to the  soil.   Wall footings are proportioned in such a way that no reinforcement is required. However in order to be able  to take care of differential settlements, these footings should have the m inimum amount of reinforcement  specified in Clause 10.2.3.   10.2.2 - Design Principles   The width of footings supporting walls should be determ ined by considering the perm issible soil strength.  The shear force to be used in dimensioning the section should be calculated at the wall face, and moment  value to be used should be calculated at a distance of 1/4 of the wall thickness from the wall face.    The footing thickness should be chosen such that the design moment is less than the cracking moment  calculated assum ing a homogenous uncracked section. Also the design shear force should be less than the  cracking shear strength.   The width of the footing supporting a wall should exceed that of the wall by at least 100mm on each side.  The thickness of the footing supporting a wall should not be less either than half the projecting width of the  footing beyond the wall or 200mm.   10.2.3 - Regulations relating to Reinforcement   Along the length of the wall at least four f10 longitudinal reinforcing bars should be placed in the footing so  that one reinforcing bar is placed at each corner of the section. These longitudinal reinforcing bars should be  confined by stirrups of at least 8 mm diameter that have a spacing of not more than 300mm (Figure 10.1).   10.3 - INDIVIDUAL COLUMN FOOTINGS (TWO-WAY FOOTINGS)   10.3.1 - General Principles   When more detailed calculations are not needed, the footings can be assumed to be rigid and the soil  pressure distribution underneath these footings can be taken as linear.    Column footings should be connected to each other in both directions with connecting beams or slabs. Such  connecting beams should be constructed in accordance with the “Specifications for Structures to be Bui lt in  Disaster Areas ”.   10.3.2 - Design Principles    Column footing base area dimensions are calculated on the basis of soil strength and settlement. For the  calculation of the footing thickness, the soil pressure distribution obtained in accordance with the principles  described above should be considered. For the dimensioning and provision of reinforcement, separate  calculations should be carried out for bending, shear force and punching shear, and the reinforcement  should be proven to have adequate development length.   51    
TURKISH STANDARD   TS 500    at least 4f10   l ‡  100 mm      at least   ≥ f8/300 mm   b   h ≥ 200 mm     ‡ l/2   Figure 10.1  Wall footing   If more precise calculations are not required, the parts of the footing extending from the column faces can be  designed as cantilever beams. The critical section for moment and shear can be assumed to be at the  column face and the punching perimeter should be assumed to be d/2 away from the column face.   The smallest dimension of an isolated footing should not be less than 0.7 meters, its area should not be less  than 1 m2 and its thickness should neither be less than 250 mm nor less than ¼ of the cantilever span  length.   10.3.3 - Regulations Relating to Reinforcement   The required reinforcement calculated in both directions should be placed at the base of the footing so as to  produce a grid.   The reinforcing bars should be placed with equal spacing.   The ratio of tension reinforcement in each direction cannot be less than 0.002 of the associated cross- section and the spacing of reinforcement cannot exceed 250mm.   10.4 - CONTINUOUS FOOTINGS   10.4.1 - General Principles   Footings supporting several vertical load bearing members such as more than one column and/or structural  walls and which are capable of transferring these loads to the soil with adequate stiffness are defined as  continuous footings. Continuous footings under vertical load carrying members lined up in one direction are  called strip footings, and continuous footings supporting vertical load carrying members placed in more than  one direction are called raft footings. Strip footings and raft footings can be designed as plates with beams or  as flat plates.   10.4.2 - Design Principles   For the evaluation of soil pressure under the footing due to the design loads, the interaction relations  between  the structure,  footing and  the sem i-elastic (or  inelastic) soil medium need  to be considered.  Satisfying compatibility between the footing deformations and soil surface deformations without considering  special stiffness distributions in the structure above is generally found to be adequate.   For this purpose, the soil can be represented by a sem i-elastic medium or more simply by a suitable number  of individual springs with adequate stiffnesses. When the ratio between the soil and footing stiffness values  is greater than certain known lim it values, the soil pressure may be assumed to have a linear distribution as  in Clause 10.3.1.   In case of continuous footings with beams, the beam depth including the plate (slab) should not be less than  1/10 of the clear span length and the plate (slab) thickness should not be less than 200mm. For footings of  this type, the shear cracking strength Vcr of the beam section as defined in Clause 8.1.3 should not be less  than the design force Vd calculated at the column face. If this cannot be achieved, the difference between  these two values should be kept as small as possible.   In the case of continuous footings arranged as flat plates without beams, the plate (slab) thickness cannot be  less than 300mm. For such combined footings, checks should be made for the shear at the column face and  the punching shear in accordance with Clause 8.1.4 and Clause 8.3.1. The contribution of reinforcement  should not be considered in case of punching shear.    52        
TURKISH STANDARD   TS 500    10.4.3 - Regulations Relating to Reinforcement   The m inimum longitudinal and transverse reinforcement ratios in all members of combined footings should  be in accordance with corresponding ratios envisaged in this standard for beams and plates (slabs). In the  compression regions of all sections under bending, compression reinforcement equal to at least 1/3 of the  amount of tension reinforcement must be provided.   In the case of deep beams and thick slabs where concrete has to be cast in more than one layer, vertical  reinforcement shall be placed at the resulting horizontal joints so that the required friction shear strength can  be obtained and the design shear forces can be resisted.   53    
TURKISH STANDARD   TS 500    11 - REINFORCED CONCRETE SLAB SYSTEMS   11.0 - NOTATION   a  bw  d  Ecb  Ecs  e  h  Ib  Is   l   ls   lsn  l1   ln   ll   l2    m  md  Md   Mo   DM  pd  t  to  pg   pq   V  Vcr  Vd    a   as    b   Support width  W idth of the rib in a joist slab  Effective depth   Modulus of elasticity of concrete in beams  Modulus of elasticity of concrete in slabs  Clear distance between two successive ribs in joist floors  Slab thickness  Gross moment of inertia of beam  Gross moment of inertia of slab   Span length used in calculations    Span length between support axes in short direction of slab   Clear span in the short direction of the slab   Span length of slab between support axes in the direction under consideration   Clear span of slab in the direction under consideration    Span length between support axes in the long direction of the slab    Span length of slab between support axes in the direction perpendicular to the direction under  consideration   l/ls   Ratio of long side to short side of the slab (Aspect ratio) m = l Design bending moment per unit width of slab  Design bending moment  Total static moment  Amount of support moment reduction  Uniform ly distributed slab design load  Plate (slab) thickness of joist slab  Thickness of drop panel (thickened slab region) in flat slabs  Uniform ly distributed slab dead load  Uniform ly distributed slab live load  Shear force at the center of the support  Cracking strength of section under shear  Design shear force  Slab moment coefficient  In two-way slabs, the ratio of sum of continuous edges to the perimeter of the slab   Ratio of beam bending stiffness to bending stiffness of slab having a width of l2,  b = EcbIb / EcsIs   11.1 - GENERAL   Provisions of this section apply to the design of one-way and two way slab systems with one or more panels,  with or without beams, and for the design of one-way and two way joist slab systems.   11.2 - ONE WAY SOLID SLABS   11.2.1 - General Principles   Reinforced concrete solid slabs under uniform ly distributed loading with an aspect ratio (long side to short   side ratio) larger than two (l l / ls > 2) are classified as one-way slabs.   In case of one way solid slabs, flexure reinforcement should only be provided in the short direction and  distribution reinforcement should be provided in the long direction. Reinforcement in one-way slabs should  satisfy the requirements given in Clause 11.2.3.   Span and support reinforcements of one-way solid slabs at the edge supports should be anchored into  beams, columns or reinforced concrete walls in accordance with the requirements of Section 9. Either  straight or hooked anchorages can be used, but the development length from the support face cannot be  less than 150 mm.   11.2.2 - Design Principles   In one way continuous flat slabs, the moments due to distributed loads are calculated by using continuous  beam theory that assumes beams to be capable of undergoing rotation freely at the supports.    55      
TURKISH STANDARD   TS 500    When the solid one-way slab is supported by beams, the design support moment is calculated by subtracting  DM=Va/3 from the moment value at the center of the support. Here, V is the shear force at the support for  the span under consideration and a is the width of the support. The support width cannot be greater than  0.175 of the span length and the reduced moment cannot be less than the value pd l 2/14. In case of solid  one-way slabs resting freely on supports, the value of the support moments should not be reduced.   In the case of continuous flat slabs spanning between reinforced concrete beams, the negative span  moments, which may develop due to live loads, can be reduced by taking the torsional stiffness of these  beams into consideration.   If the span positive moment of the of continuous slab is less than the positive moment obtained by assum ing  both ends of the slabs to be fixed, then the value for the fixed ended case should be used in designing the  section.   At the edge supports of continuous solid slabs at least half of the span reinforcement must be provided on  the top.   In case of continuous solid slabs under uniform ly distributed loading, if the ratio of any two adjacent spans is  not less than 0.8 and the ratio of live to dead load is less than two, the moments can be calculated  approximately by using the coefficients given below.   Span moments   Exterior spans     Interior spans   Md = pd l 2 / 11   Md = pd l 2 / 15   Support moments   Slabs with 2 spans only   Exterior supports   Interior supports   Slabs with more than 2 spans   Md = - pd l 2 / 24   Md = - pd l 2 / 8   Exterior supports   Interior supports of exterior   Other interior supports   Md = - pd l 2 / 24   Md = - pd l 2 / 9   Md = - pd l 2 / 10   In the above equations l is the span length under consideration. For a slab resting freely on walls, the span   length, l , can be obtained by adding the slab depth to the clear span. However, l can never exceed the  distance between the support axes and can never be less than 1.05 times the corresponding clear span  length. When calculating the support moments, the average of the span lengths and loads in adjacent spans  should be used.   The smallest perm issible thickness for one-way solid slabs is 80 mm. However in the case of solid slabs to  be used as ceilings or as a cover for some area or which would be trod upon only for cleaning or sim ilar  purposes, the slab thickness may be reduced up to 60 mm. For slabs over which vehicles m ight pass, the  thickness cannot be less than 120 mm.    In addition to the requirements above, the ratio of slab thickness to the clear span length cannot be less than  the values given below:   -   -   -   For simply supported, single span slabs    For continuous slabs    For cantilever slabs     1/25   1/30   1/12   For one-way slabs, the clear concrete cover protecting the reinforcement should be at least 15 mm.   11.2.3 - Regulations Related to Reinforcement   In case of one way solid slabs, the ratio of flexural reinforcement cannot be less than 0.003 for steel grade  S220. For steel grades S420 and S500, the ratio of flexural reinforcement cannot be less than 0.002. The  spacing of principal reinforcement cannot exceed 1.5 times of the slab thickness or 200mm. In case of single  span slabs, at least half of the bottom span reinforcement and in the case of continuous slabs at least 1/3 of  the bottom span reinforcement should be continuous from support to support.    56                                                          
TURKISH STANDARD   TS 500    In addition to the principal reinforcement that is provided in the short direction, distribution reinforcement  should be placed perpendicular to the main reinforcement at the bottom face of the slab in the long direction.  The amount of distribution reinforcement should not be less than 1/5 of the main reinforcement. The spacing  of distribution reinforcement should not exceed 300mm. On the top of the beams, along the short direction of  the slab, support reinforcement perpendicular to the principal reinforcement of the slab must be provided.  This support reinforcement, which cannot be less than 60 percent of the principal reinforcement, will be  placed on top and extended from both sides to a length of 1/4 of the short span length. In addition, for S220  grade steel, at least f8/200 mm, for S420 at least f8/300 mm and for S500 at least f5/150mm should be  used as distribution reinforcement.   11.3 - ONE WAY JOIST SLABS   11.3.1 - General Principles   Slabs made up of a thin deck and beams with clear spacing between each other not exceeding 700 mm, are  defined as joist slabs. In case of such slabs, it is possible to leave the spaces between the joist vacant as  well as to fill them with non-load-carrying filler material. As filling material, light materials such as hollow  concrete briquettes or hollow clay tile can be used (Figure 11.1).   d   t  ‡ 1/10e       ‡50 mm   e £ 700 mm   bw ‡ 100mm   Figure 11.1 Joist floor   When the joists and deck are cast monolithically, these two members act together, and it is thus possible to  dimension the span sections of joist slabs as flanged sections. The distance between two beam axes should  be taken as the effective flange width. Line loads (due to partition walls etc.) placed perpendicular to the  direction of the joists should be taken as point loads acting on the joists. W hen the magnitude of such line  loading is high, a transverse rib should be constructed below it.   11.3.2 - Design Principles   In the case of one way continuous joist slabs, the design moments due to distributed loads are calculated by  using continuous beam theory that assumes beams to be capable of undergoing rotation freely at the  supports.   The design support moment is found by reducing the moment at the centre of the support by DM (Clause  11.2.2). The support width "a" cannot be more than twice the total slab depth. The joist slab section should  be dimensioned without taking compression reinforcement into account..     At the end span of joist floors, if the torsional stiffness of the beam providing the exterior support of the joist  is ignored, the m inimum amount of reinforcement required to resist torsion as defined in Clause 8.2.5 should  be provided in the support beam. At the exterior supports of the joists, top reinforcement having an area of at  least one half of the span reinforcement should be provided.   In case of one way continuous joist slabs under uniform ly distributed loading if the ratio of any two adjacent  span lengths is not less than 0.8 and if the ratio of live to dead load is less than 2, the moments can be  calculated approximately by using equations given in Clause 11.2.2.   For joist slabs, the maximum design shear force Vd should not exceed the shear cracking strength Vcr of the  section. If this condition is not satisfied, all requirements of Chapter 8 dealing with the shear design of beams  must be fulfilled.   For one-way joist slabs, the clear spacing between joists cannot exceed 700 mm. The deck depth should  neither be less than 1/10 of the clear joist spacing nor less than 50 mm, and the joist width should not be  less than 100 mm. The ratio of total joist depth (including the deck) to the clear span should not be less than   57            
TURKISH STANDARD   TS 500    1/20 in the case of simply supported single span slabs, 1/25 in the case of continuous slabs and 1/10 in the  case of cantilevers.   If the span of joists is more than 4 meters, transverse joists (distribution ribs) of at least the same size as the  longitudinal ones should be provided. When the span is between 4 and 7 meters, one transverse joist and  when the spacing is more than 7 meters, two transverse joists should be provided. These transverse joists  should divide the span as equally as possible.   11.3.3 - Regulations Relating to Reinforcement   Flexure and shear reinforcement for joists should be calculated just as in the case of beams. However when  the design shear force is less than the shear cracking strength, it is possible not to conform to the m inimum  stirrup requirement for beams and to use open stirrups. In this case, the stirrup spacing should not exceed  250 mm.    Distribution reinforcement should be provided in both directions in the deck, Figure 11.1. The area of this  reinforcement in each direction should not be less than 0.0015 of the total cross sectional area of the slab  (deck) and the spacing should not exceed 250 mm.   11.4 - TWO WAY SOLID SLABS   11.4.1 - General Principles   Reinforced concrete solid slabs under uniform ly distributed loading, supported along all four edges and  having an aspects ratio (long side to short side ratio) equal to or less than two (l l /ls £ 2) are called two way  solid slabs. However all slabs without beams (Clause 11.4.4) are designed as two way slabs regardless of   their support conditions and   l l /  sl   ratio.   Two way flat slabs may rest on beams or walls as well as directly on columns (flat plates).   Reinforcement to be provided at critical sections must satisfy the conditions given in Clause 11.4.5.   Support and span reinforcements of flat slabs at the edge supports should be anchored into beams, columns  or reinforced concrete walls in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 9. Either straight or hooked  anchorages types can be used, but the development length of the anchorage from the support face cannot  be less than 150 mm.   11.4.2 - Design Principles   Calculations for two-way solid slabs should be carried out by using a reliable method. Internal design forces  which are calculated at critical sections with such methods, should be checked against and found to satisfy  the strength and serviceability requirements of Chapters 7, 8 and 13.   The analysis of solid slabs can be carried out by using methods like the “Equivalent Frame Method", an d the  "Yield line method" etc. For two-way slabs with or without beams, whose span lengths are almost equal to  each other or when very precise calculations are not required, the approximate methods given in this section  may be used.   For the purpose of reinforcement calculation and placement, slabs without beams are divided into two  regions, the column strip and the m iddle strip. The column strip is a design strip whose width on each side of   a column or structural wall centre line is equal to l1/4 or l2/4, whichever is narrower, Figure11.2a. The  column strip, includes the beams, if they exist, in the direction in which the moment is being calculated,  Figure 11.2b. The m iddle strip is a design strip bounded by two column strips.   The depth of a two-way slab with beams cannot be less than the value given by using Equation 11.1.   -  1      a  s  4      ‡  h  ‡  h  l  sn  +  15  20  m  80  mm  (11.1)   "as" in this equation is the ratio of the sum of the length of the slab continuous edges to the sum of the  lengths of all edges.   The depth of a two way slab without beams (flat plate or flat slab) cannot be less than the values given  below:   Slabs without beams and drop panels   Slabs with drop panels but without beams   h ‡ ln /30  and  h ‡ 180 mm   h ‡ ln /35  and  h ‡ 140 mm   58        
TURKISH STANDARD   TS 500    If the design is carried out by using any one of the approximate methods given in Clause 11.4.4, the depth of  the slab without beams cannot be less than the value given by using Equation 11.2.   h ‡ l1 /30  and  h ‡ 200 mm   (11.2)   As far as possible, the depth of a flat slab without beams should be chosen so that punching shear  reinforcement is not required. In the case of flat slabs without beams, to achieve the moment transfer  between columns and slabs, the dimension of the columns in the span direction should not be less than 1/20  of the span length in that direction nor less than 300 mm.    Requirements to be satisfied about drop panel and column capital dimensions are shown in Figure 11.3.   The clear concrete cover protecting reinforcement in two-way slabs should be at least 15 mm.   11.4.3 - Approximate Method for Two-Way Slabs with Beams   In the case of slab systems with beams, if the span lengths are not considerably different from each other or  if more precise calculations are not required, the method below can be used.     For flexural design, the theoretical section for the negative moment, the section at the support face, and for  the positive moment the section at m id span should be considered.    The slab moment per unit width should be calculated by using a coefficients in accordance with the  boundary conditions and the aspect ratio of the long side to the short side. The a coefficients can be  obtained from Table 11.1, and by using Equation 11.3. In this equation lsn is the clear span length in the  short direction.   m  d  la=  p  d  2 sn  (11.3)   Moment values obtained by using Equation 11.3 are valid for m iddle strips as defined in Clause 11.4.2.  Moment values  for column strips can be obtained by  taking 2/3 of  these values. The moment value  calculated for slabs with very short spans can be assumed to be constant over the slab width.   If the negative moment on one side of the common support of adjacent spans is less than 0.8 times the  negative moment on the other side of the common support, 2/3 of the difference of these two values should  be distributed to the neighboring slabs in proportion to the slab strip stiffnesses and the larger value should  be used in reinforcement calculations. If the difference between the two negative moments is smaller, the  greater negative moment value should be used in design. In this method redistribution of support moments  cannot be carried out.   The moment at the end support (slab assumed to be resting freely) should be taken as a certain fraction of  the span moment value given in Table 11.1, if the rotation of the slab is partially restrained at the end support  region by a structural member. If rotation is fully restrained, this ratio should be taken as 1.0, otherwise it  should be taken as 0.5.    When slab calculations are carried out with this method, the distribution of the loads to the supports should  be according to tributary areas bounded by 45o lines drawn from the corners.   11.4.4 - Approximate Methods for Two Way Slabs without Beams (Flat Slabs)   Slabs without beams can be flat plates as well as slabs with drop panels or capitals, Figure 11.4a, b and c. If  the capital makes a slope of less than 45o with the horizontal axis, then for calculations the region bounded  by column surface and the line making 45o with the column axis should be considered as the capital, Figure  11.4d.   In case of slabs with drop panels, the depth of the drop panel to cannot be less than half of the slab thickness  and the length of the drop panel in each direction cannot be less than 1/6 of the slab span in that direction  nor less than 4 times the drop panel depth, Figure 11.4a.   The punching shear strength of two way flat slabs without beams should be checked according to the  principles given in Clause 8.3.1. The punching shear perimeter for slabs with and without drop panels is  shown in Figure 11.4.   Openings may be perm itted in flat slab systems without beams provided that strength and serviceability are  proven to have been satisfied. If the punching shear strength calculated by considering openings in the slab  satisfies the safety requirements envisaged in Clause 8.3.1, there is no need to carry out separate bending  checks for the cases given below:   a) In cases where at the intersection region of two perpendicular m iddle strips all the required reinforcement  can be placed.   59      
TURKISH STANDARD   TS 500    b) In cases where at the intersection region of two perpendicular column strips, if the largest dimension of  the opening is less than 1/8 of the width of the column strip in either direction and if the amount of  reinforcement interrupted by the opening can be placed on the sides of the opening.   Calculations for flat slabs without beams can be carried out according to either of the two approximate  methods below.   11.4.4.1 - Equivalent Frame Method   Slabs without beams can be analyzed as equivalent frames in two mutually perpendicular directions. In this  analysis method, the width of the horizontal bending member of the frame should be taken as the distance  between the center lines of spans of two adjacent slabs, which are perpendicular to the frame.   The total slab load should be considered in the analysis in each direction. In calculating the column and slab  stiffnesses, the increase in the moment of inertia values due to column capitals and drop panels should be  considered.     For gravity load analysis, a single storey can be considered by assum ing the ends of columns as fixed.   The moments calculated using the equivalent frame method can be distributed in accordance with Table  11.2 to the column and m iddle strips, which are defined in Clause 11.4.2. These moments can be modified  by up to ±10 percent if the sum of the support and span moments is kept constant for each span.   Table 11.1 Distribution Coefficients for Equivalent Frame Method   Strip   Column strip   Middle strip   Half column strip  parallel to edge beam  or wall   Interior  Support  Moment   Span  Moment   Exterior Support Moment   Edge without  beam   Edge with  beam   0.75   0.25   0.40   0.60   0.40   0.30   Edge without  beam   Edge with beam   0.20   0.15   0.80   0.20   0.40   0.20   0.60   0.40   0.30   0.15   11.4.4.2 - Moment Coefficient Method    The calculations for slabs without beams satisfying all the conditions given below can be carried out with this  approximate method. This method is only applicable for vertical load analysis.   a) There should be a m inimum of 3 continuous spans in each direction.   b) The ratio of the longer to the shorter span in a panel should not be greater than 2.   c) Adjacent span lengths in any direction should not differ by more than one-third of the longer span.   d) The offset (eccentricity) of a column from the centerline of the axis of the frame should not be more  than 10 percent of the span length in the direction of the frame.   e) The ratio of live load to dead load should not exceed 2.0.   In any slab, the absolute sum of the span moment and the average of the two support moments in each  direction of any panel should not be less than   =  M  o  p  d  l  l  2  2 n  8  (11.4)   l n in this equation is the clear span length in the direction under consideration and is the face to face   distance between columns. l n can never be taken as less than 0.65 l 1. Columns with circular or regular  polygonal cross sections can be treated as equivalent square columns having the same area.   The support moment to be considered in design should be calculated at the support face. Moment re- distribution mentioned in Clause 6.3.8 cannot be applied to flat slabs when calculations are carried out by  simplified methods.   The moment M0, which is obtained from equation 11.4, should be distributed to the span and supports  according to the principles given below:   60        
TURKISH STANDARD   TS 500    For interior spans   Span moment    Support moment    For end spans   Exterior support moment   Interior support moment    Span moment    = 0.35M0   = 0.65M0   = 0.30M0   = 0.70M0   = 0.50M0   If the exterior support of a slab acts as a fixed support due to the presence of structural members like  structural walls oriented perpendicular to the direction of analysis, the support and span moment values  corresponding to that particular span should both be taken as 0.65M0 and 0.35M0 respectively.   If support moments differ on the two sides at a particular support, the larger moment value should be used in  the calculations.    The distribution of calculated moments to the column strip should be made as follows:    a) At interior supports, 75 percent of the total support moment calculated above should be given to  the column strip.   b) At edge supports, if there is no edge beam perpendicular to the direction in which the analysis is  being carried out, the total edge support moment calculated above should be given to the column  strip.   c)   If there are edge beams, 75 percent of total edge support moment calculated above should be  given to the column strip.   d) In spans, 60 percent of the total span moment calculated above should be given to the column  strip.   The distribution of the calculated moments to the m iddle strip should be made as follows:   a) The m iddle strip moment should be taken as the difference between the total moment and the  column strip moment.   b) A maximum modification of –10 percent can be made in the values of the support and span  moments calculated  for  the column strip and m iddle strip with  the method described above.  However, the total statical moment for a flat slab in the direction considered shall not be allowed to  differ from the value calculated using Equation 11.4.   c)   In monolithic systems, columns and walls form ing supports for a slab should possess enough  strength to be capable of resisting moments caused by design loads on the slab system. These  moments should be considered in the punching shear calculations given in Clause 8.3.1. When  more accurate calculations are not carried out at interior supports, the moment obtained by using  Equation 11.5 should be distributed between  top and bottom columns at a given support  in  accordance with their flexural stiffnesses.   (  )  2      (11.5)   (  =  M  0  .  07      +  p  g  p50  .  q  2  -  p  ' g  l  ' 2  l  2  n  l  ' n  )  l  In this equation   consideration.   p  '  g  ,  l  '  2  and  l  '  n  are values corresponding to the shorter span of the adjacent spans under   61                                                          
Negative moment at continuous support    Positive moment at midspan   0.033  0.025   0.040  0.030   0.045  0.034   0.050  0.038   0.054  0.041   0.059  0.045   0.071  0.053   0.083  0.062   0.033  0.025   ONE SIDE DISCONTINUOUS   Negative moment at continuous support      Positive moment at midspan   0.042  0.031   0.047  0.035   0.053  0.040   0.057  0.043   0.061  0.046   0.065  0.049   0.075  0.056   0.085  0.064   0.041  0.031   TWO ADJACENT SIDES DISCONTINUOUS     Negative moment at continuous support    Positive moment at midspan    0.049  0.037   0.056  0.042   0.062  0.047   0.066  0.050   0.070  0.053   0.073  0.055   0.082  0.062   0.090  0.068   0.049  0.037   TWO SHORT SIDES DISCONTINUOUS     Negative moment at continuous support    Positive moment at midspan   0.056  0.044   0.061  0.046   0.065  0.049   0.069  0.051   0.071  0.053   0.073  0.055   0.077  0.058   0.080  0.060   -  0.044   TWO LONG SIDES DISCONTINUOUS     Negative moment at continuous support    Positive moment at midspan   -  0.044   -  0.053   -  0.060   -  0.065   -  0.068   -  0.071   -  0.077   -  0.080   0.056  0.044   THREE SIDES DISCONTINUOUS     Negative moment at continuous support    Positive moment at midspan   0.058  0.044   0.065  0.049   0.071  0.054   0.077  0.058   0.081  0.061   0.085  0.064   0.092  0.069   0.098  0.074   0.058  0.044   FOUR SIDES DISCONTINUOUS     Positive moment at midspan   0.050   0.057   0.062   0.067   0.071   0.075   0.081   0.083   0.050                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
TURKISH STANDARD   TS 500    11.4.5 - Regulations Related to Reinforcement   In the case of two-way slabs, reinforcement to be placed in both directions at critical sections should be  based on moments calculated in accordance with the principles of Clauses 11.4.2, 11.4.3 and 11.4.4 and the  regulations given in Chapter 7. For two-way slabs with or without beams, the amount of reinforcement in  either direction cannot be less than 0.0015 and the sum of the reinforcement in both directions shall not be  less than 0.004 for steel grade S220, 0.0035 for S420 and S500. The spacing of reinforcement should not  exceed 1.5 times the slab thickness for slabs without a drop panel or 200 mm in the short direction or 250  mm in the long direction.   11.5 - WAFFLE SLABS   Two-way waffle slabs can be designed in accordance with the general principles described in Section 11.d.  For such slabs, structural analysis should be conducted in accordance with the principles of structural  mechanics and the dimensioning and placement of reinforcement should be according to the requirements  given in Clause 11.3.3.   65      
TURKISH STANDARD   TS 500    12 - REINFORCED CONCRETE WALLS   12.0 - NOTATION   Ag  Ash   gross area of reinforced concrete wall  total cross sectional area of transverse (horizontal) reinforcement in reinforced concrete wall   12.1 - GENERAL   Structural walls, walls of special structures such as silos, reservoirs, etc. and retaining walls are examples of  reinforced concrete walls whose design and construction require special rules and regulations and, in  addition, such walls must also satisfy the requirements given in this section.   Reinforced concrete walls should be dimensioned and reinforced in such a way that they can safely carry all  types of loading including forces that would develop due to shrinkage and temperature changes.   The design and dimensioning of reinforced concrete walls should be in accordance with principles, given in  Sections 6 and 7. The reinforcement of these walls should satisfy the requirements given in Section 12.3.   If it is necessary to have openings in reinforced concrete walls due to the presence of doors, windows, etc.,  then in addition to the minimum reinforcement specified in Section 12.3, at least two 16 mm bars should be  placed on each side of the opening. The development lengths of these reinforcing bars from the edges of the  opening should not be less than 40 bar diameters.   Unless a more detailed analysis has been conducted, the effective length of the wall to be considered for  each concentrated load can neither exceed the center-to-center distance between the concentrated loads,  nor the bearing length under the load plus four times the wall thickness. To resist tensile stresses in the  region below a concentrated load, principal tension reinforcement should be provided perpendicular to the  load axis.   12.2 - REGULATIONS RELATED TO SECTION DIMENSIONS   Reinforced concrete walls are vertical load carrying members having the ratio of long side to short side in  plan of at least 7. The thickness of reinforced concrete walls cannot be less than 150 mm.   12.3 - REGULATIONS RELATED TO REINFORCEMENT   On each face of reinforced concrete walls, orthogonal reinforcement comprising transverse and longitudinal  reinforcing bars should be placed. If calculations do not necessitate the provision of greater reinforcement,  the amount of transverse and longitudinal reinforcement to be placed in the reinforced concrete walls should  not be less than that given in this section.   The total area of longitudinal reinforcement (sum of both faces) for reinforced concrete walls cannot be less  than 0.0015  times  the  total cross-sectional area  (Ag) of  the wall. The  total area of  the  transverse  reinforcement on both faces of reinforced concrete walls cannot be less than this amount.   The spacing of transverse and longitudinal reinforcement can neither exceed 1.5 times the wall thickness nor  300mm.   The reinforcement on two faces of the reinforced concrete wall should be connected to each other by at least  four ties per 1 m2 of wall.   67      
TURKISH STANDARD   TS 500    13 - SERVICEABILITY REQUIREMENTS FOR REINFORCED CONCRETE MEMBERS   13.0 - NOTATION   At   Effective concrete area of tension reinforcement in members,   t =  A  2  ab  w  n  a  c  d  Ec   fctd  fyd    h  Ic   Icr   Ief   ln    Mcr   Mmax    n  y  di   dig    dt    esm    gt    l   r’  ss   ssr    w   wmax   Concrete cover measured from the center of gravity of all reinforcing bars in tension  Concrete cover measured from the center of gravity of the outermost reinforcing bar  Effective depth in case of bending members  Modulus of elasticity of concrete  Design tensile strength of concrete  Design yield strength of longitudinal reinforcement  Total depth of beam  Gross sectional moment of inertia   Cracked sectional moment of inertia relative to neutral axis  Effective moment of inertia   Clear span of member  Cracking moment of member under bending  Maximum bending moment for member  Number of reinforcing bars in tension zone  Distance between extreme tension fiber and neutral axis  Instantaneous deflection  Instantaneous deflection due to permanent loads  Total deflection  Average strain in reinforcing bars in the region between cracks  Time-dependent factor for permanent load  Permanent deflection multiplier  Ratio of compression reinforcement   Stress in the reinforcement at cracking, calculated by assuming cracked section  Stress in the reinforcement at first cracking, calculated by assuming cracked section  Crack width  Limit of allowable crack width   13.1 - GENERAL   In addition to the provision of adequate safety against collapse, reinforced concrete structures and members  should be designed and reinforced so that under the envisaged service loads there is no excessive cracking,  deformation, deflection and vibration in the members and the whole structure.   13.2 - DEFLECTION CONTROL   13.2.1 -  General Regulations   In members subjected to flexure, such as slabs and beams, deflections which would impair their function,  affect their appearance and cause cracking or crushing in adjacent non-structural connected members  should not be allowed to occur. Immediate deflections due to permanent and live loads and deflections due  to shrinkage and creep effects for these members should be computed by considering their cracked state.   In the case of beams and especially slabs, which do not support or are not attached to nonstructural  members sensitive to deflections and whose depth to span length ratios are within the limits given in Table  13.1, deflection calculations need not be carried out.    Table 13.1 Depth/span ratios for flexural members for which deflection calculations are not necessary   Member   Simple support   Exterior span   Interior Span   Cantilever   One-way slab   Two-way slab ( short span)   Joist slab   Beam   1/20   1/25   1/15   1/10   1/25   1/30   1/18   1/12   1/30   1/35   1/20   1/15   1/10   -   1/8   1/5   69        
TURKISH STANDARD   TS 500    If more reliable methods based on the principles of structural mechanics, which also take reinforced concrete  behavior into account, are not used, the immediate deflections can be calculated by using the approximate  method given in Clause 13.2.2 and the time-dependent deflections by the method presented in Clause  13.2.3.   13.2.2 - Approximate Calculation for Instantaneous Deflection   Instantaneous deflection values of reinforced concrete flexural members under permanent and live loads  the span (Mmax £ Mcr) should be calculated  with uncracked sections  in  in accordance with structural  mechanics principles by using the gross sectional moment of inertia.   For cracked sections (Mmax > Mcr), the instantaneous deflection should be calculated as given above using  the effective moment of inertia values obtained from Equation 13.1 and by considering support conditions.  The modulus of elasticity Ec to be used in this calculation should be taken from Section 3.3.   I  ef  =      M  cr  M  max  3       +  I  c  1       -      M  cr  M  max  3             I  cr  =  M  cr  f52  .  ctd  I  c  y  (13.1)   (13.2)   The cracking moment for the section should be calculated in accordance with Section 13.2. For continuous  beams and slabs, the two moment of inertia values of the span section and the support section (average of  two supports) should be calculated separately by using Equation13.1 and then the average of these two  values should be used as the effective moment of inertia. In the case of cantilevers, the moment of inertia of  the support section should be used as the effective moment of inertia.   13.2.3 - Time Dependent Deflection Calculation   Calculation of additional long-term deflections due to shrinkage and creep in reinforced concrete structures  should be made in accordance with Clause 3.3.4. If more precise calculations are not required, the total  deflection, including the time dependent deflection can be obtained by using Equation 13.3.   (13.3)   (13.4)   The coefficient, gt, in the above equation, which depends on the duration of the permanent loading, can be  obtained from Table 13.2. r ’ is the ratio of compression reinforcement in the section.   dt = di + dig l   =  +  1  ¢  λ  γ  t  ρ50  Table 13.2 Permanent Load Duration Coefficient   Loading Duration   5 years or more   12 months   6 months   3 months   Duration Coefficient gt   2.0   1.4   1.2   1.0   13.3 - Deflection Limits   Allowable maximum deflections for flexural members are given in Table 13.3: ln is the clear span.    Flexural member and location   Table 13.3 Deflection Limits   Cause of deflection   Span/Deflection   Roof member with no partition walls   Instantaneous deflection due to live load   Floor member with no partition wall   Instantaneous deflection due to live load   Roof or floor member with partition walls(*)   Sum of deflection due to permanent load  and deflection due to the remainder of live  the load  l n / 240     (*) Carrying members that may be affected by large deflections or where a partition wall exists.   Roof or floor member with partition walls   l n / 480   70   ln / 180   l n / 360             
TURKISH STANDARD   13.4 - CRACK CONTROL   13.4.1 - General Regulations   TS 500    Wide cracks that would impair the appearance of structures or lead to reinforcement corrosion should not be  allowed. The width of cracks caused by deflections due to bending, shear or torsional effects and due to  external loading as well as by volumetric deformations such as shrinkage and creep, or by tensile stresses  due to support movements, should not exceed the values given in Table 13.4.   Table 13.4 Limits for Crack W idth   Environment   Interior of structure under normal environmental condition   Interior of structure under moist and exterior of structure under normal exterior environmental  conditions   Exterior of structure under moist environmental conditions   Interior and exterior of structure under unfavorable (aggressive) environmental conditions   wmax   0.4 mm   0.3 mm   0.2 mm   0.1 mm   Crack control is not necessary if all the requirements given below are satisfied:   - Deformed bars have been used  -  In the tensile zone of reinforced concrete members, at least the minimum tension reinforcement   defined in Section 7.3 has been provided   - Unfavorable environmental conditions do not exist   - The reinforcement spacing does not exceed 200mm.   13.4.2 - Crack Width Calculation   The design crack width, w, limits of which are given in Table 13.4, can be calculated by using the equation  below for members with deformed bars. For plain bars this value should be increased by multiplying it with a  factor of 1.7. The stress in the reinforcement, ss, should be calculated by using unfactored loads. However  for steel stress, 0.7 × f yd can be used as an approximation.   w =  .  cA31  (  t  1  3  )  -  5  s  s  ·  10  (13.5)   At described in Figure 13.1 is the effective concrete area for each reinforcing bar resisting tension. If the  diameters of the reinforcing bars differ, an equivalent "n" value should be obtained by dividing the total  reinforcement area by the diameter of the biggest reinforcing bar.   If the total amount of tension reinforcement in the member is more than 1.2 times that required, the crack  width calculated can be reduced by this ratio.   d   h   a   c   bw   2a   bw   Figure 13.1  Reinforcement area in cracked region for members under pure bending  a   71                                       
TURKISH STANDARD   TS 500    14 - EVALUATION OF BUILDING STRENGTH   14.0 - NOTATION   h   lt   Dm1   Dm2  Dmp1  Dmp2    Member height   Span length in case of members under test, the length of the short edge in slabs  The bigger value of the distance between two support centers and the sum of the clear span  length and the member depth (twice the net span in cantilevers)  The maximum deflection value measured under load in the first loading test  The maximum deflection value measured under load in the second loading test  The maximum residual deflection value measured in the first loading test after load removal  The maximum residual deflection value measured in the second loading test after load removal   14.1 - GENERAL REGULATIONS   If there is any doubt about the structural safety of the whole building or some parts of the building, the  investigation and evaluation of the safety should be carried out in accordance with the requirements of this  section. If the effects of the problems in the building on the structural safety are fully understood and if the  dimensions of  the structural members and  their material properties  required  for analysis have been  established, an analytical evaluation of the structural safety can be conducted. However, if the effects of the  problems in the building on the structural safety have not been fully understood or the member dimensions  and material properties have not been determined, a loading test should be carried out.   14.2 - ANALYTICAL EVALUATION   14.2.1 - Determination of Member Dimensions and Material Properties   It is sufficient from the view point of structural safety to measure the cross-sectional dimensions of structural  elements at critical sections. The locations and diameters of reinforcing bars should be determined by on-site  measurements. However, if the measurements conducted at a sufficient number of carefully chosen points  on a variety of members in different parts of the structure are found to confirm the design drawings, it may be  assumed that the diameter and location of reinforcement for the whole building as shown in the design  drawings are correct. The engineer in charge of evaluation should determine the number of locations where  measurements have to be made.   If it is necessary to determine concrete strength, a comprehensive study based on non-destructive tests  methods should be carried out. However,  the results obtained  from  these  tests should definitely be  correlated with core test results that are much more reliable.   Dimensions and locations of cores should be chosen by the engineer so that the safety of the structure will  not be adversely affected. Core samples should be packed and transported so that they will not lose their  natural humidity.   Cores should not be stored in water and should be capped before testing. Each core should be inspected by  the engineer before testing in order to determine whether it is suitable. Cracks, voids, pieces of reinforcing  bars, etc., in cores should be noted and considered in the evaluation of the test results.   The results of tests on cores should be evaluated only by a responsible engineer. In these evaluations,  effects of the dimension and shape should be considered and necessary modifications should be made in  the strength evaluation.    If considered necessary, the reinforcement strength should be determined by carrying out material tests on  representative samples of reinforcing bars taken from the structure. If there is the possibility of a change in  the material properties of the reinforcement due to fire, it is definitely necessary to carry out such tests.   If the required dimensions of coating materials for members and slabs and of non-structural partition walls  are determined by carrying out a suitable number of reliable measurements and tests, the permanent load  factor can be reduced from 1.4 to 1.2 in the analytical evaluation of structural safety. If the material strengths  have also been determined with reliability, the material factors to be used may also be reduced. However,  the material factor can never be less than 1.3 for concrete and/or less than 1.1 for the reinforcing steel.   73          
TURKISH STANDARD   14.3 - LOAD TEST    14.3.1 - General Regulations   TS 500    Loading tests should be carried out only in connection with flexural problems in a structure. If the sudden  collapse of certain members or the whole structure is in question during the load test (e.g. due to stability,  shear or punching), load tests should not be carried out for reasons of safety.   The number and arrangement of spans or panels to be loaded and the loading arrangement should be  selected so as to cause the maximum deflection and internal forces in the most critical regions of the  structure. More than one test load arrangement for different regions of the structure should be used if a  single load arrangement is not found adequate for all critical regions.   In the load test, the total load on the selected spans or panels, taking into account the existing permanent  load, should not be less than 0.85×(1.4G+1.7Q).   A load test should not be carried out until the concrete in the floor to be loaded is at least 56 days old.  However if the owner, contractor, control organization and design engineer agree among themselves that a  load test be permitted before the concrete is 56 days old, the load test may be conducted without reference  to the age of the concrete.   14.3.2 - Application Principles   Measurements should be made at the most critical regions for deflections and cracks. The reference zero  values for all measurements should be obtained at most one hour before the start of the loading test.   The test load should be applied in at least four stages and the load increments should be as equal as  possible.   For the application of test load, bags of cement, bricks, tiles, sand, water, etc. can be used. The loading  should be as uniformly distributed as possible, and the transfer of load to certain locations due to the arching  action resulting from the stacking of the load should be prevented.    After the total test load has been in place for 24 hours, a set of measurements should be taken, immediately  after which the total test load should be removed. A set of final measurements should also be taken 24 hours  after removal of the test load.   14.3.3 - Acceptance Criteria   Structures or structural members subjected to load shall be considered to have adequate safety if the criteria  given below are taken to be satisfied,   The structure or portion thereof, which has been tested, should show no evidence of severe damage such as  crushing of compressed concrete or buckling of compression reinforcement.   In the case of loaded members, diagonal cracks which could to lead to shear failure should not be present.   In the case of loaded members, cracks along the flexural reinforcement, which may be considered a sign of  bond failure, should not be present.   The maximum deflection under load, Dm1, and the maximum residual deflection after removing load, Dmp1,  should not exceed the values given below.   D  1m  £  l  t  0  .  00005  l  t  h  D  1mp  £  D  0  .  25  1m  (14.1)   (14.2)   If the above conditions are not satisfied, another load test may be permitted.   The second test should be carried out at least 72 hours after the removal of the first test loading. If the  condition below is satisfied, the member or structure to which test loading has been applied for the second  time may be considered to be safe under vertical loading.   £  2mp  2m  (14.3)   74      .   20  If this condition also is not satisfied, the loading test cannot be repeated.   14.3.4 - Safety Provisions   Load tests should be conducted in taking necessary measures with care to provide for the safety of the  workers during the test. The engineer conducting the load test is also responsible for the safety measures.  The engineer is obliged to monitor the test continuously and stop the test in case any dangerous situation is  observed to arise.             
 engineering and in construction methods. The present paper attempts to give an overview of the   general requirements of the code.   The code covers only RC buildings, and does not cover other type of structures, such as, historical   structures, coastal and port structures. The code has two types of supplements; supplementary annexes   for a better understanding and implementation of the relevant parts of the code and includes non-  mandatory requirements. These mandatory annexes, which are an integral part of the code, contain   mandatory requirements.   The most important modification and advances introduced through the new version of the code can be   stated as follows:   a. Inclusion of a new extensive chapter on seismic effects by defining acceleration spectra for the   horizontal motions and definition of a spectrum for the vertical motions, similar to those given in   ASCE-07,   b. Inclusion of earthquakes in four levels, such as DD-1, DD-2, DD-3 and DD-4, the first two may   correspond to MCE and design earthquakes in ASCE-07,   c. Inclusion of multi performance states for socially important buildings and all high-rise buildings,   d. Inclusion of design ultimate soil pressures and use of the factored loads in foundation design,   e. Inclusion of separates sections for non-structural elements, high-rise buildings, seismically isolated   buildings, light weight steel structures,   f.   Inclusion of nonlinear deformation based analysis, design and evaluation methods for socially   important,   g. Inclusion of the overstrength factor and detailed use of the capacity design,   h. Inclusion of displacement limits depending on the connection between the partition walls and   structural elements,   2. Seismicity   Turkish Earthquake Risk Maps are developed as a result of separate project and they are published at   the same time as the code by adopting probabilistic definition of the seismic risk. In the maps,   horizontal and vertical spectral parameters are given for four different levels of earthquake. In the   previous code four earthquake zones and a fifth zone without seismic risk had been defined. However,   the new maps assume the whole country having seismic risk and give the related the parameters   depending on the geographical position. As it is in ASCE-07, the risk maps provide the parameters   (for short period) and    (for the    period) for 5% damping ratio.   Seismic risk is defined probabilistic way due to its uncertainty depending on the geographic location ,   which evaluated by considering the following parameters.   a. Geographic location-dependent parameters: the tectonic structure of the region, active faults and   fault mechanisms (Active Fault Map of Turkey, MTA-2012)   b. Earthquakes and their properties in the region (Earthquake Catalogs),   c. Soil conditions between   the source and   the region considered (Decay Relations of Seismic   Parameters, Earthquake Motion Estimation Equations).   Seismic risk is defined probabilistic way due to its uncertainty depending on the geographic location w   Spectral response acceleration parameters    and    are obtained by considering the   site soil class defined as ZA, ZB, ZC, ZD, ZE and ZF The parameters    and    which depend on soil   properties to be determined by geotechnical investigation of the top layer of   . The standard soil   having a shear wave velocity of    lays in between the soil classes ZB and ZC. The local soil   2  SS1S1.0sSDSSSSF111DSSFSF1F30m760/ms                  
parameters    and    are greater than unity to increase the spectral parameters for the soils ZC-ZF,   whereas they are less than unity to decrease them for ZA and ZB.   The seismicity parameters are given for the four seismic levels, as follows:   a. DD-1: A earthquake with 2 percent probability of exceedance within a 50-year period having a   return period of 2475 years, very rare earthquake, the maximum credible earthquake, the largest   earthquake considered)   b. DD-2: A earthquake with 10 percent probability of exceedance within a 50-year period having a   return period of 475 years, rare earthquake, standard design earthquake)   c. DD-3: A earthquake with 50 percent probability of exceedance within a 50-year period having a   return period of 72 years, frequent earthquake)   d. DD-4: A earthquake with 68 percent probability of exceedance within a 50-year period having a   return period of 43 years, service earthquake, very frequent earthquake)   In addition to the horizontal seismic motions, the code defines vertical seismic motion as well. Typical   design spectra for horizontal and vertical seismic motion are given in Figure 1.   Spectral parameters are given in the Earthquake Risk Maps depending on the geographical location.   These spectral parameters are modified by considering the local ground soil conditions. Design   Acceleration Spectrum is obtained using these parameters. The maximum earthquake loads, the   maximum displacement and the maximum internal forces are obtained by using these spectral curves.   Figure 1. Horizontal and vertical spectra   Seismic acceleration records to be used in the time domain analyses have to be compatible with the   Design Acceleration Spectrum. Appropriate acceleration records must be selected accordingly, scaled   and modified for this operation. In the selection of acceleration records the following properties have   to be taken into consideration:   a. Fault distances, source mechanisms and local ground conditions,   b. Past earthquake records,   c. Number of acceleration sets must be at least eleven.   Furthermore, in scaling and modifying of the acceleration records to be used, the followings should be   observed:   a. Amplitudes of the average of the selected acceleration records between    and    periods are   scaled so   that   they are not smaller   than   the design acceleration spectrum, where   is   the   fundamental period of the building,   b. In the three-dimensional analysis, the square root of the sum of the squares of the spectra of the two   horizontal components of each selected seismic record set is not to be less than 1.3 those of the   design spectrum in between periods    and    to the amplitudes of the design acceleration   spectrum in the same period range.   3  SF1F0(a) Elastic acceleratonspectrum for horizontalmotions(b) Elastic displacementspectrum for horizontalmotions(c) Elastic acceleratinspectrum for verticalmotionsLTT20.4SDS00g=S   (T)aeg=S     (T)aeDg=DS0.80STTBDTATB1.0TLT(s)SD1S   (T)aeSDSS   (T)/gaeTATBTLS   (T)=SdeaeT(s)T22D1STSD1S     (T)/gaeD0.80SDS0.32SDSTADTBDT0.2T1.5TT0.2T1.5T                
In addition to the horizontal seismic motions, the code defines vertical seismic motion as well. Typical   design spectra for horizontal and vertical seismic motion are given in Figure 1.   Vertical seismic effect: In buildings having DTS = 1, 1a, 2, 2a and the following elements, the code   requires analysis and design of those elements only by using the Modal Superposition Method using   the vertical elastic acceleration spectrum. In the calculation of the vertical seismic effect in the vertical   structural elements,    and    are taken. The cases which require vertical spectral analysis   can be given as follows (Figure 3):   Buildings with non-vertical columns.   Buildings with columns supported by beams,   Buildings having beams with a span of    or more,   Buildings having horizontal cantilevers with a cantilever length of    or more,   In the parts of the structural system other than the above mentioned elements and in buildings which   do not have these elements, vertical earthquake effect can be considered similar to the vertical loading   as follows:   (1)   Figure 2. The cases which require vertical spectral analysis   3. General requirements for analysis and evaluation    The code includes some new concepts in additions to those of its previous version. These concepts are   briefly summarized below.   3.1. Building-Use Classes (BUC) and Building Importance Factor (I)   They are defined depending on the use of the building. Buildings that need to be used after earthquake,   buildings which are used in long term by large number of people and buildings where valuable or   dangerous goods are stored are named as BUC=1 and assigned a building importance factor of I=1.5.   Buildings that is used by large number of people in a short period of time (BUC=2) has an important   factor of I=1.2, whereas I=1 for the remaining buildings (BUC=2).   3.2. Seismic Design Class (SDC)   It is defined depending on the Short Period Design Spectral Acceleration Coefficient    of DD-2   earthquake ground motion and on the Building Use Class. They are given as 1a-4a and 1-4. The   alphabetical index indicates a high importance. The digital index is related to the seismicity being 4 is   the lowest. For example, the earthquake design class of a school building is 1a in an area where the   earthquake effect is high (  ), whereas that of a residential building in the region where the   earthquake effect is low (  ) is 4.   3.3. Building Height Class (BHC)   Eight Building Height Classes (BHC) are defined depending on the Seismic Design Class to define the   permissible height limits for building structural systems, where buildings with BHC=1 corresponds to   the high-rise buildings and their design and evaluation requirements are given in Section 13 of the   code separately.     4  /1RI1D20m5m(2/3)ZdDSESg(c) Beam with a span morethan 20m(d) Cantilever beam witha length more than 5m(a) Non-verticalcolumns(b) Columnsupported by beamDSS0.75DSS0.33DSS                            
3.4. Structural systems of buildings   Almost all types of structural systems are defined separately in the code for reinforced concrete, steel   and masonry buildings in a long table. The table includes also, precast, timber, light-weight steel,   seismically isolated structures. For each type of buildings, several variety of structural system is   defined, including high and limited ductility system as well. For the reinforced concrete buildings the   following structural system types can be found, such as, frames, shear walls connected to each other   by with and without coupling beams and their combinations. In this table Overstrength Factor,   permitted Building Height Class and Structural Behavior Factor which is closely related to Earthquake   Load Reduction Factor are given for each structural system. As expected, the last factor depends on   the ductility of the structural system, which comprises the ductility of the structural elements and that   of the cross sections.   3.5. Building performance level   Based on the level of the structural damage level, the following four Building Performance Levels are   defined (Figure 3):   Uninterrupted Use (UU) Performance Level corresponds to a state where structural damage does not   occur in the building structural system or the damage is negligible,   Limited Damage (LD) Performance Level corresponds to a state where only very limited damage (~   nonlinear behavior) occurs in the building structural system.   Controlled Damage (CD) Performance Level corresponds to a state where damage in the structural   system is in a level that the structural system can be economically strengthened.   Collapse Prevention (CP): Performance Level is a state just before collapse of the building structural   system.   3.6. Building design approaches   The code defines the following two design and evaluation approaches:   Strength Based Design and Evaluation is accomplished by ensuring that the strength capacity (force   and moment) in the section is equal to or greater than the strength demand of the section,   Deformation Based Design and Evaluation is achieved by ensuring that the deformation capacity in   the section (unit elongation and shortening of concrete and steel and plastic rotation of the plastic   hinges) is equal to or greater than those of the deformation demand.   The deformation based design is preferred in the cases of the large seismicity to grasp the nonlinear   behavior of   the structural system and   that of   the socially   important buildings   for   increasing   approximation level of the analysis.   Figure 3. Structural performance levels   5  Limiteddamage(LD)Uninterrupteduse (UU)Controlleddamage (CD)Collapseprevention (CP)Earthquake loadControlleddamage(CD)Collapseprevention(CP)LateraldisplacementCollapseUninterrupteduse(UU)                          
3.7. Target performance levels   The code defines specific target levels to be satisfied, earthquake levels to be considered and design   and evaluation approach to be implemented for various building types to be designed and evaluated,   such as, reinforced concrete, precast, steel and seismically isolated buildings. For buildings in regions   with large seismicity and socially important buildings multiple target performance levels are required,   whereas for buildings having lower height and an importance factor being I=1, only one target   performance level is found to be satisfactorily, such as, Controlled Damage Performance Level to be   checked by using the Strength Based Design under DD-2 Earthquake. On the other hand, for high-rise   buildings the code requires very detailed analysis and design steps, checking all damage states under   in various earthquake levels by using design and deformation based approaches.    3.8. Capacity design principle   To archive ductile behavior and to prevent brittle behavior, in the case of increased earthquake effects,   the capacity design principle is used by increasing the failure capacity that produces brittle behavior   than that produces ductile behavior. This process is called Capacity Design Principle. The code   imposes use of the capacity design together with the strength based design. One of the examples of the   capacity design is that the design shearing force in beams and columns is obtained by considering the   ultimate bending capacities by taking into account strain hardening of reinforcement of the end   sections.   3.9. Equal displacement rule   This rule is widely used in the earthquake engineering often without distinctly referring to it. The   maximum displacement of a linear elastic system subjected to a seismic loading is very close to that of   the system having nonlinear inelastic behavior. This property is often stated as Equal Displacement   Rule. This rule is can be assessed only numerically, and it should be noted that this rule applies on the   result as an average. On the other hand, for the rigid systems the maximum displacement of the   nonlinear system appears to larger than that of the linear system. The reflection of this rule can be   found in the code in calculation of displacements, where seismic displacements are obtained as a result   of linear analysis by considering the elastic seismic loads. Another application can be found in   determining of   the performance points of   the structural system   in   the process of   the nonlinear   evaluation process.   3.10. Overstrength Factor D   Overstrength factor D is one of the new parameters introduced in the code. It is defined as the ratio of   yield strength to design strength   . Overstrength factor represents the ratio of actual strength   and the design strength which results in the difference of the stresses. For example the stresses in   concrete and steel can be written as    and   . Additionally, overstrength factor   increases in the structural elements when the minimum reinforcement ratio is effective. Generally , this   factor lays in between 2.0~3.0. In the capacity design, brittle capacity is kept larger than the ductile   failure to prevent the brittle failure. Therefore, it is important that the yield strength is obtained   sufficiently accurate, where overstrength becomes significant. In the application of the overstrength   factor the following points deserves attentions:   a. In evaluations of design internal forces which yield a ductile failure of the high and limited   ductility structural elements (such as, failure due to bending and due to tensile force in concrete   structural elements), an increase due to overstrength factor is not required, i.e.,   .   b. In evaluations of internal forces which yield a brittle failure of the high and limited ductility   structural elements (such as, failure due to shear force in concrete buildings and in connections in   steel buildings), an increase by the overstrength factor is required, i.e.,   . However, the   increased internal forces cannot be greater than those resulting from the capacity design.   c. In calculation of plane stresses in slab obtained by using reduced earthquake loads have to be   increased by the overstrength factor.   6  /ydDffckcdffsuykydfff1D1D                    
d. Reduced in-plane forces in building floors will be increased by the overstrength factor.   e. In buildings having basements surrounded by rigid basement walls, internal forces in the structural   elements and forces transferred to the foundations, an increase due to overstrength factor is   required, i.e.,   .   3.11. Yield strength and ductility   Pushover curves in two directions comprise a type of the backbone of the load-displacement and in the   repetitive loading and this curve can be derived from the loading experiment as well as from the   numerical analysis by considering inelastic deformations. As it is seen, the seismic loading in a   structural system is limited by its capacity not by the extent of the seismic effect (Figure 4). When the   seismic effects   increases,   the   inelastic deformation   increases only. The   limits of   the   inelastic   deformations govern by the ductility capacity and by the second order effects.   3.12. Earthquake Load Reduction Factor   Elastic seismic loads are determined by using well known principles of the structural dynamics. These   loads are reduced by employing Seismic Load Reduction Factor which depends on the ductility of the   structural system (Figure 4). Generally, this factor depends on the performance level considered and   on the extent of the inelastic deformations. When inelastic deformations large and extensive, larger   reduction   factor   is expected. However,   the code specifies Structural System Behavior Factor   depending on the type of the structural system which equal to the Seismic Load Reduction Factor   except for very low load period of the structures. When the period of the structural system is very low,   it is expected that extend of the inelastic deformations will be very limited, so is the seismic load   reduction factor. For very low periods, reduction factor approaches to the Overstrength Factor.   Figure 4. Yield strength reduction factor and earthquake load reduction factor   4. Structural irregularities    They are defined in plane and in elevation. The code defines structural irregularities in the horizontal   plane and in the elevation and encourages eliminating irregularities as much as possible (Figure 6 and   7). However, when it is unavoidable, while some of the structural irregularities cause punishments,   such as, by increasing the earthquake effect and by requiring more detailed analysis, only very limited   number of structural irregularity is banned, such discontinuity of shear walls in lower stories or   discontinuity of a column by supporting it to cantilever beam. The planar irregularities can be stated as   torsional irregularity, openings in slabs and planar shape irregularity, whereas the irregularities in   elevation are strength and stiffness irregularities and discontinuity of columns and shear walls.   The code points to the significance of the structural system and the architectural configuration of the   building and stresses to the following points distinctly.   Simplicity of structural system enables designer to use less assumptions for modeling and for analysis,   to predict its response under vertical and seismic loadings and to check results relatively easily.   Predictable and assessable structural behavior can be attained, when structural system has symmetry   and regularity with respect to mass, stiffness and strength. Analysis of irregular structures requires   large number of assumptions. Uncertainties in behavior material and earthquake loading affect results   negatively.   7  1D()aRTTsTsR  = Earthquake load reduction factorR  = Structural system bahavior factorD  = Overstrength factor    = Building importance factoraIR  = Yield strength reduction factor    = Ductilityy(b)(a)R/RTB0DTaRTB01TyI                            
High level of redundancy enables the structural system to resist to the external loads even if a few   elements fail. Generally, the higher the static degree of indeterminacy of the system is, the larger the   level of the redundancy. One other property is the load path which is closely related to redundancy as   well. It is expected that more than one continuous load path should be provided, so that if one of the   load path fails, the other should be used to transfer the vertical and seismic loads from the point where   is originated down to the foundation. Along the load paths, connections and elements having adequate   strength and deformation capacity should be provided.   Figure 5. Structural irregularities in plane   Figure 6. Structural irregularity in elevation   5. Strength-based design    Strength-based design starts with a linear earthquake analysis of the structural system under reduced   earthquake loads. Earthquake internal forces are increased with Overstrength Factor, when   they   correspond to a brittle failure mode and combined with internal forces due to the gravity load to obtain   the corresponding Strength Demand. Finally, cross sections and structural elements is designed that   their capacity is equal or higher than the corresponding demand. In the final step drift ratio is checked.   The design process is repeated by updating the cross sections and the structural configuration until   acceptable results are found.   6. Structural systems   The code defines three structural systems depending on ductility levels:   a.   b.   c.   Structural systems having high ductility   Structural systems having limited ductility   Structural systems having mixed systems   Structural systems with high ductility have higher structural behavior factor, i.e., higher earthquake   load reduction factor and lower design earthquake load, however they satisfy additional rules as   8  3AStructural irregularity1A21/3>Total story areaArea of openinsi,mini,max= (+) / 2i,ort>0.20/yay0.20>xl/xayaxaxlyli ,max= () > 1.2bii,avgAAb=Earthquakedirectioni ,minli,max1AStructural irregularityStructural irregularity(A)ei+1i(eA)B32B=kii,orti+1,ort>2.0i-1ii-1(eA)i+1Discontinuityin column1B=ci< 0.80i+1(        )Ae/ieA(        )+shearw walls +0.15 masonry walls=Cross sectional area of columnsAe=ci< 0.80i-1(        )Ae/ieA(        )hhhi+1ii-1/ h )/(i/ h   )i+1=kii,orti-1,ort>2.0/ h )/(i/ h   )i-1Structural irregularityStructural irregularityStructural irregularityDiscontinuityin shear wall                            
application of the capacity design and as reinforcement detailing. Structural systems having limited   ductility satisfies less strict rules, whereas their design earthquake loads are high. On the other hand,   structural systems of mixed type are a combination of frames having limited ductility and shear walls   having high ductility and steel diagonal frames.   The code gives the maximum height limits for each type of the structural system depend ing on the   seismic Design Class, which depends on the seismicity of the area and on the building-use class.   Furthermore, the structural behavior factor and the overstrength factor is also given depending on the   structural system. The code gives    and    for the basement floors by considering that   their high stiffness and low ductility.   Figure 7. a) Shear walls and frames system and b) Coupled shear wall system   The code gives some specific conditions related to the structural systems consisting of a combination   of frames and shear walls as follows:   a. A system can be regarded a combination of high ductility frames and high ductility shear walls (or   steel diagonal frames), when the ratio of the sum of the overturning moments of the shear walls    to the seismic total base moment    satisfies (Figure 7a):   (2)   which maintained a reasonable balance between frames and shear walls. The relation ensures that   the contribution of the frame system to the overturning moment is not smaller than 25%, because   the frame system has large ductility and redundancy. On the other hand, this relation also ensures   that the contribution of the shear walls is smaller than 40%, because the shear walls have very   high lateral load capacity and lateral stiffness.   b. A system can be regarded a mixed structural  systems, i,e., a combination of limited ductility   frames and high ductility shear walls (or steel diagonal frames), when the ratio of the sum of the   overturning moments of shear walls    to the seismic total base moment    satisfies   (Figure 7a):   (3)   This relation ensures that the contribution of the high ductility shear walls is smaller than 25%,   because the shear walls have very high lateral load capacity and lateral stiffness. They have   significant ductility, because they designed accordingly.   Coupled concrete shear walls:   Behavior of the coupled concrete shear walls are in between frames and shear walls, depending on   their opening and their coupled beams. They are formed by connecting the two-part shear walls   connected with short beams having very high shear strength. Two shear walls connected to each other   9  /2.5RI1.5DMc2MOVERHMMNVNVM1System consisting ofshear walls and framesCoupled shearwall systemOVERoMOVER(b)(a)OVERMoM0.40/0.75OVERoMMOVERMoM/0.25OVERoMM                                    
by beams can be regarded as a coupled concrete shear wall provided that following relation is   satisfied:   (4)   where    is the overturning moment and    is the connectivity coefficient, which represents the   frame effect (Figure 7b). This condition ensures that the frame effect is significant. However, when the   connectivity coefficients high and close to unity, then the connecting beams will excessively be   enforced. For this reason the code recommends that the connectivity coefficient satisfies   .   Factor for the effective section rigidity:   The code requires that the effective section stiffnesses are used in the analysis of reinforced concrete   buildings to consider cracking of concrete and nonlinear deformations of concrete and steel. A global   reduction factor is defined for each structural element to be applied to the gross section rigidities, such   as normal force and bending moment rigidities. As seen, when the bending moment is effective, the   reduction is small, whereas the reduction is less effective when the normal force is effective.   7. Concluding remarks   In the present paper, the main principles of the new Turkish Building Seismic Code are discussed. The   code has been prepared as detailed as possible. However, due to the variety of buildings in practice,   there will certainly be some issues to be interpreted. Simplicity of the code is important for its   conscious implementation by the practicing engineers. In the construction of earthquake resistant   buildings, it is important to prepare the projects in accordance with the code and also important to   make the construction in accordance with the project as much as the code. The Turkish seismic code   has been brought to the highest level possible in terms of earthquake engineering. For its conscious   implementation by the practicing engineers, professional training with the contribution of official   institutions, universities and chamber of civil engineers is of vital importance. However, it is worth to   note that the most important step in our country is on-site implementation of the project and the steps   to be taken in this regard will ensure that the issue is carried to the upper level.   References   [1]   Celep Z 2018 Introduction into Earthquake Engineering and Earthquake Resistant Design,   (Istanbul: Beta Publications)   [2]   Turkish Building Seismic Code 2018, Prime Ministry, Disaster and Emergency Management   Presidency (AFAD), Ankara, 2018.   [3]   Specification for Buildings to be Built in Seismic Zones (2007), Ministry of Public Works and   Settlement, Ankara, 2007.   [4]   [5]   [6]   [7]   ACI Building Code Requirements for Structural Concrete 2014, American Concrete Institute.   TS500 Requirements for Design and Construction of Reinforced Concrete Structures 2000,   Turkish Standard Institute.   Explanatory Examples for Turkish Seismic Code 2018, Chamber of Civil Engineers, İstanbul.   ASCE-07, Minimum Design Loads for Buildings and Other Structures, ASCE, 2010.   10  121/3VVOVERVcNcNMMMcNOVERM2/3                      
2.4.3.2 - In case where the requirements specified in 6.2.1.2 and 6.2.1.3 of Chapter 6   are not met, spectrum characteristic periods defined in Table 2.4 for local site class Z4   shall be used.   2.4.4. Special Design Acceleration Spectra   When   required, elastic acceleration spectrum may be determined   through special   investigations by considering   local seismic and site conditions. However spectral   acceleration coefficients corresponding to so obtained acceleration spectrum ordinates   shall   in no case be   less   than   those determined by Eq.(2.1) based on   relevant   characteristic periods specified in Table 2.4.   S(T)   2.5   1.0   S(T) = 2.5 (TB / T )  0.8  TA   TB   Figure 2.5   T   (*) See APPENDIX   12   53-14                              
2.5. REDUCTIOҭ OF ELASTIC SEISMIC LOADS: SEISMIC LOAD           REDUCTIOҭ FACTOR   Elastic seismic loads determined in terms of spectral acceleration coefficient defined in   2.4 shall be divided to below-defined Seismic Load Reduction Factor to account for the   specific nonlinear behaviour of the structural system during earthquake. Seismic Load   Reduction Factor, Ra(T), shall be determined by Eqs.(2.3)   in   terms of Structural   Behaviour Factor, R, defined in Table 2.5 below for various structural systems, and the   natural vibration period T.   ( T  ) = 1.5 + ( R  −  1.5)                     (0  ≤  T  ≤  T  A  )  (2.3)   T  T  A  R  a  R  a  ( T  ) =   R                                                     ( T  <  T  )  A  2.5.1. General Conditions on Ductility Levels of Structural Systems   2.5.1.1 – Definitions of and requirements to be fulfilled for structural systems of high   ductility level and structural systems of nominal ductility level, for which Structural   Behaviour Factors are specified in Table 2.5, are given in Chapter 3 for reinforced   concrete buildings and in Chapter 4 for structural steel buildings.   2.5.1.2 – In structural systems denoted as being high ductility level in Table 2.5,   ductility levels shall be high in both lateral earthquake directions. Systems of high   ductility or mixed ductility level in one earthquake direction and of nominal ductility   level in the perpendicular earthquake direction shall be deemed to be structural systems   of nominal ductility level in both directions.    2.5.1.3 – In structural systems where ductility levels are the same in both directions or   those with high ductility level in one direction and mixed ductility level in the other   direction, different R factors may be used in different directions.     2.5.1.4 – Reinforced concrete flat slab systems without structural walls as well as bare   or infilled joist and waffle slab systems whose columns and beams do not satisfy the   requirements given in 3.3, 3.4 and 3.5 shall be treated as systems of nominal ductility   level.    2.5.1.5 – In the first and second seismic zones;   (a) Excluding paragraph (b) below, the use of structural systems of high ductility level   is mandatory for buildings with structural systems comprised of frames only.   (b) In structural steel buildings with Building Importance Factor to Table 2.3 is I = 1.2   and I = 1.0, structural systems composed of only frames of nominal ductility level may  be used, provided that the condition of HN ≤ 16 m is met.    (c) In all buildings with Building Importance Factor to Table 2.3 is I = 1.5 and I = 1.4,   structural systems of high ductility level or structural systems of mixed ductility defined   in 2.5.4.1 shall be used.    2.5.1.6 – Structural systems of nominal ductility level without structural walls may be   permitted only in the third and fourth seismic zones with the following conditions:   (a) Reinforced concrete buildings defined in 2.5.1.4 may be constructed provided that  HN ≤ 13 m.   13   53-15                    
(b) Excluding those defined in 2.5.1.4, reinforced concrete and structural steel buildings   with structural systems comprised of only frames of nominal ductility level can be  constructed provided that HN ≤ 25 m.    TABLE 2.5 – STRUCTURAL BEHAVIOUR FACTORS (R)                          BUILDI̱G STRUCTURAL SYSTEM   Systems of   Systems of    ̱ominal   Ductility   Level   High   Ductility   Level   (1) CAST-Iҭ-SITU REIҭFORCED COҭCRETE           BUILDIҭGS   (1.1) Buildings in which seismic loads are fully resisted by   frames................................................................................   (1.2) Buildings in which seismic loads are fully resisted by   coupled structural walls......................................................     (1.3) Buildings in which seismic loads are fully resisted by   solid structural walls...........................................................   (1.4) Buildings in which seismic loads are jointly resisted   by frames and solid and/or coupled structural walls............    (2) PREFABRICATED REIҭFORCED COҭCRETE           BUILDIҭGS   4   4   4   4   (2.1) Buildings in which seismic loads are fully resisted by   frames with connections capable of cyclic moment transfer   3   (2.2) Buildings in which seismic loads are fully resisted by    single-storey frames with columns hinged at top................   ──   (2.3) Prefabricated buildings in which seismic loads are   fully resisted by prefabricated or cast-in-situ solid and/or   coupled structural walls with hinged frame connections .....   ──   (2.4) Buildings in which seismic loads are jointly resisted    by frames with connections capable of cyclic moment tran-    sfer and cast-in-situ solid and/or coupled structural walls    (3) STRUCTURAL STEEL BUILDIҭGS    (3.1) Buildings in which seismic loads are fully resisted by   frames................................................................................   (3.2) Buildings in which seismic loads are fully resisted by    3   5   single-storey frames with columns hinged at top...............   ──   (3.3) Buildings in which seismic loads are fully resisted by   braced frames or cast-in-situ reinforced concrete structural    walls   (a) Concentrically braced frames.......................................   (b) Eccentrically braced frames.........................................   (c) Reinforced concrete structural walls.............................   (3.4) Buildings in which seismic loads are jointly resisted    by frames and braced frames or cast-in-situ reinforced    concrete structural walls   (a) Concentrically braced frames.......................................   (b) Eccentrically braced frames.........................................   (c) Reinforced concrete structural walls.............................   4   ──   4   5   ──   4   14   8   7   6   7   7   3   5   6   8   4   5   7   6   6   8   7   53-16                                                                                                      
2.5.2. Conditions for Solid Structural Wall-Frame Systems of High Ductility Level                 Requirements for buildings where seismic   loads are   jointly resisted by reinforced   concrete solid structural walls of high ductility   level and   reinforced concrete or   structural steel frames of high ductility level are given below:   2.5.2.1 – In order that R=7 can be used for the cases with cast-in-situ reinforced concrete   and steel frames or R=6 for the case with prefabricated reinforced concrete frames as   given in Table 2.5, sum of bending shears developed at the bases of solid structural   walls under seismic loads shall not exceed 75% of the total base shear developed for the  entire building (αS  ≤ 0.75).    2.5.2.2 – In the case where the requirement given in 2.5.2.1 cannot be satisfied, R factor  to be used in the range 0.75 < αS ≤ 1.0 shall be determined with R = 10 − 4 αS for the  cases with cast-in-situ reinforced concrete and steel frames and with R = 9 − 4 αS for the   case with prefabricated reinforced concrete frames.    2.5.2.3 – In structural walls of Hw / ℓw ≤ 2.0, internal forces calculated according to   above-defined R factors shall be amplified by multiplying them with [3 / (1 + Hw / ℓw)].   However amplification factor shall not be taken more than 2.    2.5.3. Conditions on Mandatory Use of Structural Walls in Certain Systems of              ҭominal Ductility Level    Structural systems of nominal ductility level defined in paragraphs (a) and (b) of 2.5.1.6   can also be constructed in all seismic zones as well as above the height limits defined in   the same paragraphs. However in such cases it is mandatory to have solid or coupled   structural walls of high ductility level or nominal ductility level in full height of   reinforced concrete buildings, and concentric or eccentric braced   frames of high   ductility level or nominal ductility level in structural steel buildings.   2.5.3.1 – In the case where structural walls of nominal ductility level are used in the   structural system, the sum of shears obtained in each earthquake direction from seismic   loads at the bases structural walls shall be more than 75% of the total base shear   developed for the entire building.     2.5.3.2 – In the case where structural walls of high ductility level are used in the   structural system, requirements given below in 2.5.4.1 for mixed structural systems   shall be applied.   2.5.4. Conditions for Structural Systems of Mixed Ductility   2.5.4.1 – Structural systems of nominal ductility level defined in paragraphs (a) and (b)   of 2.5.1.6 may be used in combination with structural walls of high ductility level.   Reinforced concrete solid and coupled structural walls or concentric or eccentric braced   frames (for steel buildings) may be used in such structural systems with mixed systems   of ductility levels, provided that the following conditions are satisfied.   (a) In the analysis of such mixed systems, frames and walls shall be considered jointly,  however in all cases αS  ≥ 0.40 shall be satisfied in each earthquake direction.   15   53-17                      
(b) When αS  ≥ 2/3 is satisfied in both earthquake directions, R factor defined in Table   2.5 for the case where seismic loads are fully resisted by structural walls of high   ductility level  (R = RYP) may be used for the entire structural system.   (c) In the range 0.40 < αS < 2/3, the relationship of R = RNÇ + 1.5 αS (RYP − RNÇ) shall   be applied in both earthquake directions.   2.5.4.2 – Reinforced concrete rigid peripheral walls used in basements of buildings shall   not be taken into consideration as parts of structural wall systems or structural wall-  frame systems given in Table 2.5. Rules to be applied to such buildings are given in   2.7.2.4 and 2.8.3.2.   2.5.5. Conditions for Buildings with Columns Hinged at Top   2.5.5.1 – In reinforced concrete buildings comprised of single-storey frames with   columns hinged at top;    (a)   In   the case of cast-in-situ reinforced concrete columns, R factor defined   for   prefabricated buildings in (2.2) of Table 2.5 shall be used.   (b) Requirements applicable to prefabricated reinforced concrete and steel buildings are   given in 2.5.5.2, for which R factors are specified in (2.2) and (3.2) of Table 2.5. The   requirements for the use of such frames as the top storey (roof) of cast-in-situ concrete,   prefabricated or steel buildings are given in 2.5.5.3.   2.5.5.2 – A single, partial mezzanine floor can be constructed inside of such single-  storey buildings with no more than 25% of plan area of the building. Structural system   of mezzanine floor may be taken into account in the seismic analysis together with the   main structural frames. In such a case the combined system shall be designed as a   system of high ductility level. It shall be checked whether torsional irregularity defined   in Table 2.1 exists in the combined system and if existed it shall be considered in the   analysis. The   joints of mezzanine floor with   the main frames may be hinged or   monolithic connection.    2.5.5.3 – In the case where single-storey frames with columns hinged at top are used as   the top storey (roof) of cast-in-situ concrete, prefabricated or steel buildings, R factor   defined at (2.2) or (3.2) of Table 2.5 for top storey, (Rüst), and the R factor that could be   defined differently for the lower stories, (Ralt), may be used jointly, provided that the   following conditions are met.   (a) Initially seismic analysis shall be performed according to 2.7 or 2.8 with R = Ralt   considered for the entire building. Reduced and effective story drifts defined in 2.10.1   shall be obtained from this analysis for the entire building.   (b) Internal forces of the top storey shall be obtained by multiplying the internal forces   calculated at (a) by the ratio (Ralt / Rüst).    (c) Internal forces of the lower stories shall be made of two parts. The first part are those   calculated at (a). The second part shall be obtained additionally by applying the forces   calculated at (b) as support reactions of top storey columns to the structural system of   the lower stories after multiplying them by (1 – Rüst / Ralt).   16   53-18                
2.6. SELECTIOҭ OF AҭALYSIS METHOD   2.6.1. Analysis Methods   Methods to be used for the seismic analysis of buildings and building-like structures   are, Equivalent Seismic Load Method given in 2.7, Mode-Combination Method given in   2.8 and Analysis Methods in the Time Domain given in 2.9. Methods given in 2.8 and   2.9 may be used for the seismic analysis of all buildings and building-like structures.   2.6.2. Application Limits of Equivalent Seismic Load Method   Buildings for which Equivalent Seismic Load Method given in 2.7 is applicable are   summarised in Table 2.6. Methods given in 2.8 or 2.9 shall be used for the seismic   analysis of buildings outside the scope of Table 2.6.    TABLE 2.6 – BUILDIҭGS FOR WHICH EQUIVALEҭT SEISMIC LOAD                                  METHOD IS APPLICABLE   Seismic    Zone   1, 2   1, 2   Type of Building    Buildings with torsional irregularity coefficient   satisfying the condition ηbi ≤ 2.0 at every storey   Buildings with torsional irregularity coefficient   satisfying the condition ηbi ≤ 2.0 at every storey and at   the same time without type B2 irregularity   3, 4   All buildings   Total Height    Limit    HN ≤ 25 m   HN ≤ 40 m   HN ≤ 40 m   2.7. EQUIVALEҭT SEISMIC LOAD METHOD    2.7.1. Determination of Total Equivalent Seismic Load   2.7.1.1 – Total Equivalent Seismic Load (base shear), Vt , acting on the entire building in   the earthquake direction considered shall be determined by Eq.(2.4).   V  t   =   WA T (  1  )  R  a  ( T  1  )  ≥   0.10  A I W  o   (2.4)   The first natural vibration period of the building, T1 , shall be calculated in accordance   with 2.7.4.   2.7.1.2 – Total building weight, W, to be used in Eq.(2.4) as the seismic weight shall be   determined by Eq.(2.5).   W   =   w∑  i  N  i=1  Storey weights wi of Eq.(2.5) shall be calculated by Eq.(2.6).   wi = gi + n qi   (2.5)   (2.6)   Live Load Participation Factor, n   , shown   in Eq.(2.6)   is given   in Table 2.7. In   industrial buildings, n = 1 shall be taken for fixed equipment weights while crane   payloads shall not be taken into account in the calculation of storey weights. In the   calculation of roof weights for seismic loads, 30% of snow loads shall be considered.   17   53-19                                      
TABLE 2.7 – LIVE LOAD PARTICIPATIOҭ FACTOR (n)   Purpose of Occupancy of Building   Depot, warehouse, etc.   School, dormitory, sport facility, cinema, theatre, concert hall, car park,    restaurant, shop, etc.    Residence, office, hotel, hospital, etc.   n   0.80   0.60   0.30   2.7.2. Determination of Design Seismic Loads Acting at Storey Levels   2.7.2.1 – Total equivalent seismic load determined by Eq.(2.4) is expressed by Eq. (2.7)   as the sum of equivalent seismic loads acting at storey levels (Fig. 2.6a):    V  t   =   ∆  F  N  +   N  ∑  i=1  F  i  (2.7)   2.7.2.2 – The value of additional equivalent seismic load, ∆FN , acting at the ̱’th storey   (roof) of the building shall be determined by Eq.(2.8).    ∆  F  N   = 0.0075  ̱ V  t  (2.8)   2.7.2.3 – Excluding ∆FN , the remaining  part of  the total equivalent seismic load shall   be distributed to stories of the building (including ̱’th storey) in accordance with   Eq.(2.9).   F  i   = ( V  t  − ∆  F  N  )   w H  i   i  N  ∑  j=1  w H  j   j  (2.9)   2.7.2.4 – In buildings with reinforced concrete peripheral walls at their basements being   very rigid relative to upper stories and basement floors behaving as rigid diaphragms in   horizontal planes, equivalent seismic loads acting on the basement stories and on the   upper stories shall be calculated independently as in the following. These loads shall be   applied together to the combined structural system.   (a) In determining the total equivalent seismic load and equivalent storey seismic loads   in accordance with 2.7.1.1, 2.7.2.2 and 2.7.2.3, appropriate R factor shall be selected   from Table 2.5 without considering the rigid peripheral basement walls and seismic   weights of the upper stories only shall be taken into account. In this case, foundation top   level considered in the relevant definitions and expressions shall be replaced by the   ground floor level. Fictitious loads used for the calculation of the first natural vibration   period in accordance with 2.7.4.1 shall also be based on seismic weights of the upper   stories only (Fig.2.6b).   (b) In calculating equivalent seismic loads acting on rigid basement stories, seismic   weights of basements only shall be   taken   into account and calculation shall be   independent of upper stories. For such parts of the building, Spectrum Coefficient shall   be taken as S(T) = 1 without calculating the natural vibration period. In determining   equivalent seismic loads acting on each basement storey, spectral acceleration obtained   from Eq.(2.1) shall be multiplied directly with the respective weight of the storey and   resulting elastic loads shall be reduced by dividing them to  Ra(T) = 1.5 (Fig.2.6c).   (c) In-plane strength of ground floor system, which is surrounded by very stiff basement   walls and   located   in   the   transition zone between upper stories, shall be checked   according to the internal forces obtained from this analysis.   18   53-20                      
Fbk = Ao I wbk / 1.5      (c)     (b)   Figure 2.6    2.7.3. Displacement Components to be Considered and Application Points of              Seismic Loads   2.7.3.1 – In buildings where floors behave as rigid horizontal diaphragms, two lateral   displacement components and the rotation around the vertical axis shall be taken into   account at each floor as independent static displacement components. At each floor,   equivalent seismic loads determined in accordance with 2.7.2 shall be applied to the  floor mass centre as well as to the points defined by shifting it +5% and −5% of the   floor length in the perpendicular direction to the earthquake direction considered in   order to account for the additional eccentricity effects (Fig. 2.7).   2.7.3.2 – In buildings where type A2 irregularity exists and floors do not behave as rigid   horizontal   diaphragms,   sufficient   number   of   independent   static   displacement   components shall be considered to account for the in-plane deformation of floors. In   order to consider additional eccentricity effects, each of the seismic loads acting on the  individual masses distributed over each floor shall be shifted by +5% and −5% of the   floor length in perpendicular direction to the earthquake direction considered (Fig. 2.8).   2.7.3.3 – In the case where type A1 irregularity defined in Table 2.1 exists at any i’th  storey such that the condition 1.2 < ηbi ≤ 2.0 is satisfied, ±5% additional eccentricity   applied   to   this   floor according   to 2.7.3.1 and/or 2.7.3.2   shall be amplified by   multiplying with coefficient Di given by Eq.(2.10) for both earthquake directions.   D i =   bi  η    1.2  2      (2.10)   19   53-21                          
 2.7.4. Determination of First ҭatural Vibration Period of Building   2.7.4.1 – In the case where Equivalent Seismic Load Method is applied, the natural   vibration period of the building dominant in the earthquake direction shall not be taken   longer than the value calculated by Eq.(2.11).   T  1   = 2  N   ∑ π     ∑  i=1  N  i=1  m d  i   2  fi  F d  fi   fi  /  2  1        (2.11)   Fictitious  load Ffi acting on  the  i’th storey shall be obtained  substituting any value (for example a unit value) in place of  (Vt − ∆FN),  see Fig. 2.9.   from Eq.(2.9) by   2.7.4.2 – Regardless of the value calculated by Eq.(2.11), natural period shall not be   taken longer than 0.1̱  in buildings with ̱ > 13 excluding basement(s).   20   53-22                                          
2.7.5. Internal forces in Element Principal Axes   Figure 2.9   Under the combined effects of independently acting x and y direction earthquakes to the   structural system, internal forces in element principal axes a and b shall be obtained by   Eq.(2.12) such that the most unfavourable results yield (Fig. 2.10).   B  a  B  b   = ±  B  ax  ± 0.30  B  ay      veya     B  a   = ± 0.30   B  ax  ±  B  ay   = ±  B  bx  ± 0.30  B  by      veya     B  b   = ± 0.30  B  bx  ±  B  by  (2.12)   x  earthq.   direction   b  a  b  a  y    b  a  x    b  a  b  a  a  a  b  b  a  b   y earthq.   direction   Figure 2.10   2.8. MODE COMBIҭATIOҭ METHOD   In this method, maximum internal forces and displacements are determined by the   statistical combination of maximum contributions obtained from each of the sufficient   number of natural vibration modes considered.   2.8.1. Acceleration Spectrum   Reduced acceleration spectrum ordinate to be taken into account in any n’th vibration   mode shall be determined by Eq.(2.13).   21   53-23                                            
In the case where elastic design acceleration spectrum is determined through special   investigations in accordance with 2.4.4, relevant spectrum ordinate shall be considered   in Eq.(2.13) in lieu of Sae(Tn).   2.8.2. Dynamic Degrees of Freedom to be Considered   2.8.2.1 –   In buildings where   floors behave as   rigid horizontal diaphragms,   two   horizontal degrees of freedom in perpendicular directions and a rotational degree of   freedom with   respect   to   the vertical axis passing   through mass centre shall be   considered at each storey. At each floor, modal seismic loads shall be determined for   those degrees of freedom and  shall be applied to the floor mass centre as well as to the  points defined by shifting it +5% and −5% of the floor length in the perpendicular   direction to the earthquake direction considered in order to account for the additional   eccentricity effects (Fig. 2.7).   2.8.2.2 – In buildings where type A2 irregularity exists and floors do not behave as rigid   horizontal diaphragms, sufficient number of dynamic degrees of freedom shall be   considered to account for the in-plane deformation of floors. In order to consider   additional eccentricity effects, each of the modal seismic loads acting on the individual  masses distributed over each floor shall be shifted by +5% and −5% of the floor length   in perpendicular direction to the earthquake direction considered (Fig. 2.8). In such   buildings,   internal force and displacement quantities due   to additional eccentricity   effects alone may also be calculated in accordance with 2.7. Such quantities shall be   directly added to those combined in accordance with below given 2.8.4 without taking   into account additional eccentricity effects.   2.8.3. Sufficient ҭumber of Vibration Modes to be Considered   2.8.3.1 – Sufficient number of vibration modes, Y, to be taken into account in the   analysis shall be determined to the criterion that the sum of effective participating   masses calculated for each mode in each of the given x and y perpendicular lateral   earthquake directions shall in no case be less than 90% of the total building mass.     2  Y  Y  N  xn  xn  i  n=1  n=1  i=1  n   2  Y  Y  N  yn  yn  i  n=1  n=1  i=1  n   =   0.90    =   0.90   L  M  m  M  L  M  m  M  ≥  ∑  ∑  ∑  ≥  ∑  ∑  ∑  (2.14)   The expressions of Lxn , Lyn and modal mass Mn shown in Eqs.(2.14) are given below   for buildings with rigid floor diaphragms:   N  N  xn  i  xin  yn  i  yin  i=1  i=1  N  2  2  2  n  i  xin  i  yin  i  in  i=1  =   Φ      ;       =   Φ   =   ( m  Φ  +   Φ  +   Φ  )  L  m  L  m  M  m  mθ  θ  ∑  ∑  ∑  (2.15)   53-24                              
2.8.3.2 – In buildings with reinforced concrete peripheral walls at their basements being   very rigid relative to upper stories and basement floors behaving as rigid diaphragms in   horizontal planes, it may be sufficed with the consideration of vibration modes which   are effective in the upper stories only. In this case, in the analysis performed by the   Mode Combination Method which corresponds to the analysis by Equivalent Seismic   Load Method as given in Paragraph (a) of 2.7.2.4, the coefficient R shall be selected   from Table 2.5 without considering the rigid peripheral basement walls whereas the   upper storey masses only shall be taken into account. Paragraphs (b) and (c) of 2.7.2.4   shall be applied as they are given for Equivalent Seismic Load Method.    2.8.4. Modal Combination   Rules   to be applied for   the statistical combination of non-simultaneous maximum   contributions of response quantities calculated for each vibration mode, such as the base   shear, storey shear, internal force components, displacements and storey drifts, are   specified   in   the following provided   that   they are applied   independently   for each   response quantity:   2.8.4.1 – In the cases where natural periods of any two vibration mode with Tm < Tn   always satisfy the condition  Tm / Tn  < 0.80,  Square Root of Sum of Squares (SRSS)   Rule may be applied for the combination of maximum modal contributions.   2.8.4.2 – In the cases where the above given condition is not satisfied, Complete   Quadratic Combination (CQC) Rule shall be applied for the combination of maximum   modal contributions. In the calculation of cross correlation coefficients to be used in the   application of the rule, modal damping factors shall be taken as 5% for all modes.   2.8.5. Lower Limits of Response Quantities   In the case where the ratio of the base shear in the given earthquake direction, VtB ,   which is obtained through modal combination according to 2.8.4, to the base shear, Vt ,   obtained by  Equivalent  Seismic  Load  Method  through Eq.2.4 is less than the below  given value of β (VtB < βVt), all internal force and displacement quantities determined   by Mode Combination Method shall be amplified in accordance with Eq.(2.16).   B  D   =   β  V  t  V  tB  B  B  (2.16)   If at least one of the irregularities of type A1, B2 or B3 defined in Table 2.1 exists in a  building β=0.90, whereas none of them exists β=0.80 shall be used in Eq. (2.16).   2.8.6. Internal forces in Element Principal Axes    Under the combined effects of independently acting x and y direction earthquakes to the   structural system, the directional combination rule given in 2.7.5 shall be additionally   applied to the internal forces obtained in element principal axes a and b by modal   combination according to 2.8.4 – see Fig. 2.10.   23   53-25                              
2.9. AҭALYSIS METHODS Iҭ TIME DOMAIҭ   Artificially generated, previously recorded or simulated earthquake ground motions can   be used in linear or nonlinear seismic analysis of buildings and building-like structures   in the time domain.   2.9.1. Artificial Earthquake Ground Motions   In the case where artificial ground motions are used, at least three earthquake ground   motions shall be generated with the following properties.   (a) The duration of the strong motion part shall neither be shorter than 5 times the   fundamental period of the building nor 15 seconds.   (b) Mean spectral acceleration of generated ground motions for zero period shall not be   less than Aog.   (c) Mean spectral accelerations of artificially generated acceleration records for 5%   damping ratio shall not be less than 90% of the elastic spectral accelerations, Sae(T),   defined in 2.4 in the period range between 0.2T1 and 2T1 with respect to dominant   natural period, T1 , of the building in the earthquake direction considered. In the case   where linear elastic analysis is performed in the time domain, spectral accelerations   defined by Eq.(2.13) shall be considered to define the reduced earthquake ground   motion.   2.9.2. Recorded or Simulated Earthquake Ground Motions   Recorded earthquakes or physically simulated ground motions with appropriate source   and wave propagation characteristics can be used for seismic analysis to be performed   in   the   time domain. Local site conditions should be appropriately considered   in   selecting or generating such ground motions. At least three earthquake ground motions   shall be selected or generated satisfying all of the conditions given in 2.9.1.    2.9.3. Analysis in the Time Domain   In the case where nonlinear analysis is performed in the time domain, internal force-  deformation relationships representing the dynamic behaviour of elements of structural   system under cyclic loads shall be defined through relevant literature with proven   theoretical and experimental validations. If three ground motions are used the maxima   of the results, and if at least seven ground motions are used the mean values of the   results shall be considered for design.   2.10. LIMITATIOҭ OF DISPLACEMEҭTS, SECOҭD ORDER EFFECTS             AҭD SEISMIC JOIҭTS    2.10.1. Calculation and Limitation of Effective Storey Drifts   2.10.1.1 – The reduced storey drift, ∆i , of any column or structural wall shall be   determined by Eq.(2.17)   as   the difference   of displacements between   the   two   consecutive stories.   d −  i  1  ∆  i   = d  i  −  24   (2.17)   53-26                          
In Eq.(2.17) di  and  di−1 represent lateral displacements obtained from the analysis at   the ends of any column or structural wall at stories i and (i - 1) under reduced seismic   loads. However the condition given in 2.7.4.2 as well as the minimum equivalent   seismic load condition defined by Eq.(2.4) may not be considered in the calculation of  di and ∆i.       2.10.1.2 – Effective storey drift , δi , of columns or structural walls at the i’th storey of a   building shall be obtained for each earthquake direction by Eq.(2.18).   δ  i   =    R  ∆   i  (2.18)   2.10.1.3 – The maximum value of effective storey drifts, (δi)max, obtained for each   earthquake direction by Eq.(2.18) at columns or structural walls of a given i’th storey of   a building shall satisfy the condition given by Eq.(2.19):    δ  (  )  i max  h  i  ≤   0 02  .  (2.19)   This limit may be exceeded by 50% in single storey frames where seismic loads are   fully resisted by steel frames with joints capable of transferring cyclic moments.   2.10.1.4 – In the case where the condition given by Eq.(2.19) is not satisfied at any   storey of the building, the seismic analysis shall be repeated with increased stiffness of   the structural system. However, even if the condition is satisfied, serviceability of non-  structural brittle elements (e.g. façade elements) under effective storey drifts shall be   verified by calculation.   2.10.2. Second-Order Effects   Unless a more refined analysis considering the nonlinear behaviour of structural system   is performed, second-order effects may be   taken   into account   in accordance with   2.10.2.1.   2.10.2.1 – In the case where Second-Order Effect Indicator, θi , satisfies the condition   given by Eq.(2.20) for the earthquake direction considered at each storey, second-order   effects shall be evaluated in accordance with the currently enforced specifications of   reinforced concrete or structural steel design. (∆i)ort  shall be determined in accordance with 2.10.1.1  as  the  average value of reduced   storey drifts calculated for i’th storey columns and structural walls.   2.10.2.2 – In the case where the condition given by Eq.(2.20) is not satisfied, seismic   analysis shall be repeated with sufficiently increased stiffness of the structural system.    2.10.3. Seismic Joints   Excluding the effects of differential settlements and rotations of foundations and the   effects of temperature change, sizes of gaps to be retained in the seismic joints between    building blocks or between the old and newly constructed buildings shall be determined   in accordance with the following conditions:   25   53-27                      
2.10.3.1 – Unless a larger value is obtained in accordance with 2.10.3.2 below, sizes of   gaps shall not be  less  than  the square root of sum of squares of average storey  displacements multiplied by the coefficient  α  specified below. Storey displacements to   be considered are the average values of reduced displacements di calculated within a   storey at the column or structural wall joints. In the cases where the seismic analysis is   not performed for the existing old building, the storey displacements shall not be   assumed to be less than those obtained for the new building at the same stories.    (a) α = R / 4  shall be taken if all floor levels of adjacent buildings or building blocks   are the same.   (b) α = R / 2 shall be taken if any of the floor levels of adjacent buildings or building   blocks are not the same.   2.10.3.2 – Minimum size of gaps shall be 30 mm up to 6 m height. From thereon a   minimum 10 mm shall be added for every 3 m height increment.   2.10.3.3 – Seismic joints shall be arranged to allow the independent movement of   building blocks in all earthquake directions.   2.11. SEISMIC LOADS APPLIED TO STRUCTURAL APPEҭDAGES,                             ARCHITECTURAL ELEMEҭTS, MECHAҭICAL AҭD ELECTRICAL             EQUIPMEҭT   2.11.1 – Equivalent seismic   loads   to be applied   to structural appendages such as   balconies, parapets, chimneys, etc. and to all architectural elements such as façade and   partition panels, etc. as well as the seismic loads to be used for the connections of   mechanical and electrical equipment to the structural system elements are given by   Eq.(2.21).   The seismic   load shall be applied horizontally   to   the mass centre of   the element   concerned in a direction to result in most unfavourable internal forces. The seismic   loads to be applied to non-vertical elements shall be half the equivalent seismic load   calculated by Eq.(2.21).      2.11.2 – In the case where the sum of mechanical or electrical equipment weights, as   denoted by we in Eq.(2.21), exceeds 0.2wi at any i’th storey, equipment weights and the   stiffness properties of their connections to the building shall be taken into account in the   earthquake analysis of the building structural system.   2.11.3 – In the case where floor acceleration spectrum is determined by appropriate   methods to define the peak acceleration at the floor where mechanical or electrical   equipment is located, Eq.(2.21) may not be applied.    2.11.4 – Twice the seismic load calculated by Eq.(2.21) or determined according to   2.11.3 shall be considered for fire extinguishing systems, emergency electrical systems   as well as for equipments connecting to infill walls and for their connections     26   53-28                            
2.12. ҭOҭ-BUILDIҭG STRUCTURES   Non-building structures permitted to be analysed in accordance with the requirements of   this chapter and the corresponding Structural Behaviour Factors, (R), to be applied to   such structures are given in Table 2.8. Applicable Seismic Load Reduction Factors   shall   be   determined   in   accordance with Eq.(2.3). Where   applicable, Building   Importance Factors specified in Table 2.3 shall be used for non-building structures.   However Live Load Participation Factors specified in Table 2.7 shall not be applied.   Except snow loads and crane payloads, unreduced weights of all solid and liquid   materials stored and mechanical equipment shall be used.   TABLE 2.8 - STRUCTURAL BEHAVIOUR FACTORS                     FOR ҭOҭ-BUILDIҭG STRUCTURES   TYPE OF STRUCTURE   Elevated   liquid   tanks, pressurised   tanks, bunkers, vessels carried by   frames of high ductility level or steel eccentric braced frames    Elevated   liquid   tanks, pressurised   tanks, bunkers, vessels carried by   frames of nominal ductility level or steel concentric braced frames    Cast-in-situ reinforced concrete silos and industrial chimneys with   uniformly distributed mass along height (*)  Reinforced concrete cooling towers (*)   Space  truss  steel  towers,  steel  silos  and  uniformly distributed mass along height (*)   industrial   chimneys with   Guyed steel high posts and guyed steel chimneys    Inverted pendulum type structures carried by a single structural element    with mass concentrated at the top    Industrial type steel storage racks  Analysis of such structures shall be performed in accordance with 2.8 or 2.9 by   considering sufficient number of discrete masses defined along the structure.   2.13. REQUIREMEҭTS FOR SEISMIC AҭALYSIS REPORTS   The following requirements shall apply to the analysis reports that include seismic   analysis of buildings:   2.13.1 - Types of irregularities specified in Table 2.1 shall be evaluated in detail for the   building to be designed and, if any, existing irregularities shall be identified.   2.13.2 - The selected structural system of high or nominal ductility level shall be clearly   defined with respect to the requirements of Chapter 3 or Chapter 4, and the selection   of the applicable R factor from Table 2.5 shall be explained.   2.13.3 - The selection of the applicable analysis method in accordance with 2.6 shall be   clearly explained by considering   the seismic zone, building height and structural   irregularities involved.       27   53-29                              
2.13.4 - The following rules shall be applied   in   the cases where   the analysis   is   performed by computer:   (a) Analysis report shall include three-dimensional illustrations of structural system by   indicating the joint and element numbering.   (b) All input data as well as output data including internal forces and displacements   shall be included in the analysis report in an easily understandable format.   (c) The title, author and the version of the computer software used in the analysis shall   be clearly indicated.   (d) When requested by the approval authority, theory manual and user’s guide of the   computer software shall be included in the analysis report.   2.14. IҭSTALLATIOҭ OF STROҭG MOTIOҭ RECORDERS   Upon endorsement by the Ministry of Public Works and Settlement, strong ground   motion accelographs shall be permitted to be installed by the ministry or university   institutions on the public, private or corporate buildings and other structures for the   purpose of recording   the strong earthquake motions, and owners or operators of   buildings or structures shall be responsible from the safety of such instruments.     28   53-30                                                                        
Relevant clauses from   APPEҭDIX   CHAPTER 3 – EARTHQUAKE RESISTAҭT DESIGҭ REQUIREMEҭTS                              FOR REIҭFORCED COҭCRETE BUILDIҭGS    3.0. ҭOTATIOҭ   = Effective shear area at any storey for the earthquake direction considered   ∑Ae  ∑Ag                 walls in the direction parallel to the earthquake direction considered   ∑Ak                 any storey in the direction parallel to the earthquake direction considered   = Sum of section areas of structural elements at any storey behaving as structural   = Sum of masonry infill wall areas (excluding door and window openings) at    Aw   = Effective web area of column cross section (excluding protrusions in the                  direction perpendicular to the earthquake direction)  ∑Aw   = Sum of effective web areas of column cross sections, Aw’s at any storey   CHAPTER 6 – FOUҭDATIOҭ SOILS AҭD EARTHQUAKE RESISTAҭT                               DESIGҭ REQUIREMEҭTS FOR FOUҭDATIOҭS   6.2. DETERMIҭATIOҭ OF SOIL COҭDITIOҭS   6.2.1. Soil Groups and Local Site Classes   6.2.1.1 – Soil groups and   local   site classes   to be considered as   the bases of   determination of   local   soil conditions are given   in Table 6.1 and Table 6.2,   respectively. Values of soil parameters in Table 6.1 are to be considered as standard   values given for guidance only in determining the soil groups.   6.2.1.2 – Soil   investigations based on appropriate   site and   laboratory   tests are   mandatory to be conducted for below given buildings with related reports prepared and   attached to design documents. Soil groups and local site classes to be defined in   accordance with Table 6.1 and Table 6.2 shall be clearly indicated in reports.   (a) All buildings with total height exceeding 60 m in the first and second seismic zones,   (b) Irrespective of the building height, buildings in all seismic zones with Building   Importance Factor of  I=1.5  and  I=1.4  according to Table 2.3 of Chapter 2.   6.2.1.3 – Regarding the buildings outside the scope of above given 6.2.1.2, in the first   and second seismic zones, available local information or observation results shall be   included or published references shall be quoted in the seismic analysis reports to   identify the soil groups and local site classes in accordance with Table 6.1 and Table   6.2.   6.2.1.4 – In the first and second seismic zones, horizontal bedding parameters as well as   horizontal and vertical load carrying capacities of piles under seismic loads in Group   (C) and (D) soils according to Table 6.1 shall be determined on the basis of soil   investigations including in-situ and laboratory tests.   29   53-31                               